
Should Boris Johnson be sent empty away?
Letters


Wed 19 Jun 2019 18.36BST


Last modified on Wed 19 Jun 2019 18.38BST


George Pitcher is surely right to bewail the Church of Englands silence over the prospect of a Boris Johnson premiership (My battered church should take a stand on Boris Johnson, Journal, 18 June). But the central question that might hopefully be asked by church leaders would be about his suitability to lead one of the most unequal societies in the world, where the gap between rich and poor has never been more evident. The Church of England was not always so timid: 1983 saw the publication of Bishop David Sheppards Bias to the Poor, followed in 1985 by the Church of Englands report Faith in the City, highlighting the levels of unemployment, housing needs and dire poverty in our inner cities. The report was rubbished by some Conservative politicians, and Margaret Thatcher lamented its focus on state action. Bishop David Jenkins also denounced government actions on mine closures and spoke up for the miners strike.
Jesus said there should be good news for the poor and that they must be lifted up and the rich sent empty away. Boris Johnson knows what it means to be rich, picking up 120,000 for a speech and 275,000 for a weekly Daily Telegraph column in addition to his MPs salary. Meanwhile the Trussell Trust reports a record number of people using food banks and The Childrens Society reports that one in three children in the UK live in poverty. So it is time for the bishops to ask how such a man, from such a background, who is advocating tax cuts for the well paid, can ever hope to bring about a more equal and just society. Should he in fact be sent empty away?Rev Adrian AlkerChair, Progressive Christianity Network Britain
 In a society largely engulfed in individualism, self-interest and greed, it is not surprising that Boris Johnson, who embodies these attributes, is by far the most popular candidate in the Tory leadership race. The focus of Christians and all others who are concerned about our societys values should be concentrated on counteracting the values of the prevalent culture.Ahilya NooneGlasgow
 The Church of England, with other churches, recently prayed Thy Kingdom come over nine days from Ascension to Pentecost. It wasnt a prayer for Boris Johnson. Christians find the God of Good Friday and Easter to be trustworthy. Whatever qualities Johnson has, being trustworthy is not one of them. Gods kingdom is heralded by a suffering king, not by the fear of foreigners and lies on buses.Rev John Longuet-HigginsHartpury, Gloucestershire
 Its interesting that the Church of England is being questioned over its lack of noise about Boris Johnson and that its a central tenet of our Christian faith to welcome people exactly as they are. This from a member of the established church that is exempt from the Equality Act, thereby allowing the continuance of its discrimination against LGBTQ+ people. Removal of mote from own eye, I think.David Mason Raithby, Lincolnshire
 No, George Pitcher, the church should not be apolitical. Have you forgotten that Archbishop Desmond Tutu said: When people say that the Bible and politics dont mix, I ask them what Bible they are reading.Rev Catherine Dyer Salisbury
 I joined the Labour party the year I was ordained, believing there to be a synergy between the 