
The shameful truth about Britains response to Grenfell
Contact author


Fri 14 Jun 2019 06.00BST


Last modified on Fri 14 Jun 2019 11.14BST


Last month Peter Mason, the chair of the Barking Reach residents association, contacted the builder Bellway Homes, requesting an investigation into the fire risk at his block of flats, following a BBC Watchdog report that revealed fire safety problems at two other Bellway developments. The company reassured him there was nothing to worry about. The wooden cladding had been treated so that it would take 30 minutes before a fire could take hold. We understand that these news articles are highly alarming for all residents of new homes, the company responded. And I hope that the above statement has allayed any fears you may have over the safety and construction of your Bellway home.
On Sunday the cladding at De Pass Gardens, part of the Barking Reach development, caught fire in 70 seconds and soon consumed the building. Andrew Boff, the chair of the planning committee on the London Assembly, who lives opposite and was on the scene to help rescue people, told the London Evening Standard there was no alarm and of course no sprinklers. Miraculously, nobody died.
The very next day, at an event in parliament to commemorate the second anniversary of the Grenfell fire, in which 72 people died and a further 70 were injured, Willie Thompson, a former Grenfell resident, confronted the housing secretary, James Brokenshire. Theres another Grenfell in the post and it is going to land on your door. You guys are doing almost nothing. Does it take another Grenfell?
Tragically, given this governments attitude to working people, wavering between the callous and the capricious, and a broader state of civic ennui, it might.
The states culpability in this regard is clear. As my colleague Robert Booth has reported, in the two years since the fire, the public inquiry into what happened at Grenfell has not reported (and will not until October); tens of thousands of people still live in blocks covered in the same highly flammable cladding; and despite Theresa Mays promise that everyone would be rehoused within three weeks, 17 families remain in temporary accommodation, with one in a hotel. Nobody has been held accountable and police investigations into potential manslaughter and health and safety violations arent expected until 2021.
Natasha Elcock of Grenfell United has described the lack of progress as beyond frustrating. Is it incompetence or is it indifference? she asked the Guardian. Two years on, it feels nigh impossible to parse the two. Indeed it seems like the latter makes the former possible. It is the governments indifference that makes it incompetent. Its not an issue of capacity. It could fix these things if it wanted to. But it doesnt care enough.
In that sense, precious little has changed. From the outset Grenfell was a charred and gruesome monument to neglect. Not benign neglect  the absent-minded inattention of those who did not know, failed to prioritise or were engaged elsewhere  but malign: the knowing and wilful lack of interest of a political, rentier and media class that were aware of the issues but unmoved until tragedy forced them to respond.
That was true in an immediate sense. The tenants had warned the landlord of the potential for disaster and the landlord had ignored them, most blatantly in the grimly lucid warning, seven months before the 