
In a Soviet-era nuclear town, I brought Lithuanias forgotten side to light
After the last reactor closed down, it was easy to ignore Visaginas. But I reached out to its isolated communities


Wed 12 Jun 2019 06.00BST


Last modified on Thu 13 Jun 2019 00.23BST


On a rainy and gloomy November evening in 2015, feeling a little like Alice in Wonderland, I took the last train from Vilnius to the north-eastern edge of Lithuania. The train was spacious. I didnt know those old trains still existed in my country. You could easily dance among the aged wooden benches, on which people were sitting scattered here and there. Speaking in Russian, they made me feel as if I was travelling on the Trans-Siberian railway. My heart was racing, because at the end of this surreal ride I would see the man I loved. Wed met two weeks earlier, and here I was on my way to visit him in the most unexpected of places: the nuclear plant town of Visaginas, in an area kept secret and closed off during the Soviet period, and where today 20,000 people still live.
The aura surrounding Visaginas had always been spooky, alien, apocalyptic
The aura surrounding Visaginas had always been spooky, alien, apocalyptic. Isolated amid forests and lakes, the Russian-speaking single-industry town was built in 1975. When the last reactor closed in 2009, Visaginas experienced an identity crisis. It was rumoured to be a separatist Russian enclave inside Lithuania. I had mentally pictured a ruined place, similar to the evacuated city of Pripyat, next to the Chernobyl reactor.
The train pulled up in the middle of deep woods and I stepped out of my carriage. The railway station was far outside the town. The first human being I saw through the window of the taxi was a barefoot, long-haired, massively tattooed man in his mid-30s wearing colourful trousers and beads. Strolling down the alleyway, he looked so out of the ordinary among the Soviet housing blocks that for a moment I thought I was hallucinating. The cab drove through unbelievably wide streets named Cosmos, Festival, Soviet, Youth. I couldnt see a single private house, only endlessly repetitive grey- and red-brick blocks. Pine trees were everywhere, and the place looked as though it had been frozen in time: not apocalyptic but daydreamy.
A few months later I decided to settle in Visaginas. Id become attached to this time capsule surrounded by lush wilderness. Here in the atomic town I skated on frozen lakes, trekked through icy swamps, warmed up inside cute saunas and fixed my broken bond with mother nature. I found a local yoga teacher, Oksana. She wore long fake lashes and changed the colour of her hair every two months. Sometimes she struggled to translate words from Russian to Lithuanian, and would apologise for that. I quickly noticed how embarrassed young Visaginians were about the language barrier.
Eventually Oksana joined the local border patrol school, while her twin brother went to serve in the Lithuanian army.
In this secluded little republic of Visaginas, the younger generation felt neither fully Russian nor Lithuanian: their identities were fluid, floating somewhere in between. Residents were highly skilled professionals, proud of having built the town and the plant. They were also disillusioned, angry and misrepresented in the Lithuanian media. One of the biggest online news platforms had described Visaginas as a threat to Lithuanias security. The headline claimed 