Leicester City defender Harry Maguire is set to seal an £80m switch to Manchester City, who will pay the England international £280,000-a-week to move to the Etihad.
Barcelona legend Samuel Eto'o has urged Liverpool striker Mohamed Salah to quit European champions Liverpool and move to the Nou Camp if he has ambitions to be one of the best players in the world.
Arsenal have had a second bid rejected for Celtic defender Kieran Tierney, with the Scottish champions holding out for a fee of around £25m.
Manchester United boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has made a personal plea to Ed Woodward for the club to 'speed up' a deal for £63m-rated Sporting Lisbon midfielder Bruno Fernandes.
United are also confident they can beat rivals Manchester City to sign Leicester star Harry Maguire.
Manchester City striker Leroy Sane is set to snub the advances of Bayern Munich and sign a new contract at the Etihad.
Manchester United will trigger their 12-month extension option in Marcus Rashford's contract to prevent an immediate exit from the England striker.
Arsenal boss Unai Emery will ask their board to break the bank to sign Crystal Palace forward Wilfried Zaha, who would be expected to cost around £55m.
Southampton have made a take-it-or-leave-it £14m offer for Birmingham City striker Che Adams.
Inter Milan and Manchester United are still some way off arriving at an agreement for the sale of striker Romelu Lukaku, with the Italians' valuation at least £20m short of the £75m United want for him.
Celtic have joined Rangers and Aberdeen in the fight to sign Derby County left-back Max Lowe.
Oran Kearney's spell as St Mirren manager looks to be over due to a breakdown in the relationship between him and chairman Gordon Scott, despite Kearney keeping the Buddies in the Scottish Premiership last season.
Referee Andrew Dallas has retired from international duty but will continue to take charge of matches in the SPFL.
Arsenal are having to reassess their options in attempting to sign a winger as potential deals for Yannick Carrasco and Ryan Fraser have stalled.
Atletico Madrid are on the verge of completing the €120m signing of Benfica attacker Joao Felix, with Manchester United set to miss out on the Portuguese sensation.
Marko Grujic is expected to spend another season out on loan away from Liverpool.
Everton have confirmed Nikola Vlasic has left the club to join CSKA Moscow.
Newcastle United winger Rolando Aarons is a loan target for Greek side Panathinaikos.
Aston Villa are joint-favourites to sign Wolves striker Helder Costa.
Wolves will rival Inter Milan for the signing of Lyon midfielder Lucas Tousart, according to reports.
West Brom have offered wonder-kid Louie Barry the equivalent of a three-year deal in a bid to keep him at The Hawthorns.
Stoke defender Erik Pieters has emerged as a target for PSV Eindhoven.
AZ Alkmaar have confirmed they are interested in signing Southampton's forgotten man Jordy Clasie.
Watford are not in talks to sign West Brom defender Craig Dawson.
Marc Navarro is interested in a move away from Watford due to a lack of playing time.
Watford striker Luis Suarez will join Real Zaragoza on loan next season, according to reports.
West Ham have identified Callum Wilson as their primary summer transfer target and will lodge a £35m bid for the England striker, according to reports.
Norwich have emerged as potential suitors for Benfica attacking midfielder Filip Krovinovic, who is set to leave the Portuguese club on loan this summer.
Hibs are close to signing Yeovil defender Tom James, according to reports.