
Could banning sunscreen to help save coral do more harm than good?

Could banning sunscreen to help save coral do more harm than good?
Hawaii, Mexico and Palau are encouraging tourists to use reef-friendly lotions  but protecting ourselves from the sun shouldnt fall by the wayside
Lisa Niven-Phillips


Wed 19 Jun 2019 12.00BST


Last modified on Wed 19 Jun 2019 14.13BST


Last year, the Pacific nation of Palau announced that, from 2020, it will ban sunscreens containing certain chemicals linked with coral degradation. Tourists will have offending suncreams confiscated and anyone importing them will face a $1,000 (800) fine. In addition, Hawaiis ban on sunscreens that contain oxybenzone or octinoxate  the two most controversial chemical compounds  comes into force in 2021, and tourists swimming at certain beauty spots in Mexico are already forbidden from wearing non-biodegradable sunscreens.
If it all sounds pretty serious, thats because it is. Sunscreen is supposed to be an entirely good thing. Having been a holiday essential since we learned about the damaging effects of UVB  and, later, UVA  rays last century, it is the stuff of nostalgia, adventure and longed-for escapes to warmer climes. News that the coconut-scented creams we have been slathering on for protection could be toxic to the environment is as welcome as a seven-day rainy forecast. So where do we stand with it as we head into summer?
First, the basics. Sunscreens fall into two categories. Chemical sunscreens (also counterintuitively known as organic sunscreens) absorb harmful UV rays. Mineral sunscreens (also known as physical sunscreens) create a shield-like layer on top of the skin to deflect them.
The bans focus on some chemical sunscreens, with oxybenzone, one of the most commonly used ingredients, attracting particular ire. A 2015 study by Dr Craig Downs, an expert on the impacts of sunscreens on marine life, suggested that the ingredient (an organic compound also known as benzophenone-3) had a toxic effect on coral even at a concentration equivalent to one drop in 6.5 Olympic-size swimming pools.
But not everyone agrees that there is a problem. Dr Emma Meredith, director general of the UKs Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association (CTPA), is disappointed by the bans. She cites a lack of scientific evidence linking oxybenzone, octinoxate (a UVB-absorbing compound) and coral reef discolouration, and adds: Cosmetic ingredients and their safety are kept under constant review by the European Commission and EU member states.
LOral, which sells both chemical and mineral sunscreens, has worked with the Scientific Centre of Monaco to study the effects of its UV filters on coral bleaching. The report, published this year, states that LOrals five main organic filters do not negatively affect coral.
Each sun filter provides a specific type of protection, which is why sunscreen products or daily photo-protection products are usually composed of a combination of filters to guarantee the most adapted protection, says a spokesperson for the company, which states that all products undergo a strict safety evaluation for humans and the environment before being placed on sale.
But consumers are taking matters into their own hands, with brands reacting in turn. Worldwide, Google searches for reef-safe sunscreen have more than quadrupled in the past five years, with brands including Caudalie, Banana Boat and Badger adding oxybenzone-free or reef-friendly labels to relevant products. Boots Soltan says none of its sunscreens contains oxybenzone or octinoxate, because we work hard to ensure we source ingredients that protect environments across 