
The mother challenging police and power to solve her daughter's murder
When Carolinas body was found on wasteland in Ecuadors capital, her mother, Amanda, did not believe she died of natural causes. Her investigation has now led to a conviction

Dan Collyns


Thu 20 Jun 2019 07.00BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.12BST


Amanda* makes pastries to sell around the streets of Quito, she is not a detective. But the day after she buried her youngest daughter she started to move to track down those responsible.
Carolina Andrango had promised her mother she would not run away again. The 15-year-old had been through a difficult two years. She had fallen in with a bad crowd, her school grades had dropped and she had spent time in a drug rehabilitation clinic. Shed gone missing from home for days at a time. But on a shopping trip in August, it felt like happier times. Her mother bought her a new backpack and Carolina fooled about with her older sister, making a video on her phone.
Then Carolina got a phone call from a boy asking her to come out to eat salchipapas (hot dogs) in the Comit del Pueblo neighbourhood where they lived in the north of Quito, the Ecuadorean capital.
Excited, Carolina pleaded with her mother to let her go. Amanda was worried, but reasoned her daughter was getting back on the right track. Reluctantly, she agreed. Make sure youre back in an hour and a half. Be careful, dont trust the people around you, she told Carolina.
Trust me, Mami, I know how to defend myself, Carolina said.
She hugged me and gave me a kiss on the forehead, Amanda recalls. It was 25 August 2018.
Trust me, Mami. Ill be back, Carolina had said.
The following day Carolinas body was found dumped on a patch of wasteland. She had been gang-raped and strangled.
On Monday in Quito, a 17-year-old boy, who cannot be identified for legal reasons, was convicted of rape resulting in death and sentenced to eight years detention. He was also ordered to pay $4,000 (3,192) to Carolinas family. Later this year, a man is due to face trial in connection with Carolinas death and is also expected to be charged with trafficking with the purpose of sexual exploitation.
Earlier this month, two teenage girls were found guilty of tampering with a crime scene and given one year probation.
But the fact anyone is standing trial for Carolinas death is not down to the work of the authorities. Faced with police inaction, it was Amanda who single-handedly began the investigation into her daughters death.
Despite an autopsy indicating a violent death, Amanda was told by the police homicide squad, Dinased, that her daughter had died of acute pancreatitis brought on by alcoholic intoxication, according to documents seen by the Guardian. The police concluded there was no case to answer.
Carolinas body was returned to her family, who took it home in a casket for the wake.
I lifted the lid and my daughter had blows on her face, on her forehead, her lip was broken, her hands looked as if shed been trying to defend herself, Amanda sobbed. How could she have died from natural causes?
Amanda resolved to make her own inquiries. I buried my daughter on the 29th. On the 30th I started to move, she said. She began by checking Facebook videos featuring her daughter and others. She spoke to Carolinas 