Manchester United transfer rumours
Who have United been linked with this summer? The latest rumours...
The latest on who Manchester United have been linked with this summer. Warning! It's already a very long list...

The latest players Man Utd have been linked with...
Christian Eriksen - The Tottenham playmaker is eyeing a switch to United or Juventus after seeing his dream move to Real Madrid collapse (Sunday Mirror, June 23).
David Brooks - United are considering a summer move for Bournemouth forward David Brooks (The Sun, June 20).
Bruno Fernandes - Tottenham believe Bruno Fernandes will join Manchester United after meeting the player's representatives this week (The Sun, June 21); United are reportedly very close to completing the £60m signing of Fernandes (Daily Star, June 11); Liverpool are to rival Tottenham and Manchester United for the signing of 24-year-old Fernandes from Sporting Lisbon. (Record, June 8).

Max Aarons - Manchester United are stepping up their interest in Norwich defender Max Aarons, who they see as an alternative to Aaron Wan-Bissaka, according to Sky Sports News (Sky Sports News, June 20).

Paulo Dybala - The forward could be used as a makeweight in a return to Juventus for Paul Pogba (The Daily Telegraph, June 20).

Issa Diop - Diop's representatives are due to hold talks with West Ham about his future next week (Sky Sports News, June 20); Sources close to the player say he can be sold for £60m (Sky Sports News, June 17); Manchester United are interested in signing the player and willing to pay £45m plus a player for the West Ham defender (Sky Sports News, June 16); But West Ham will resist any offers for Manchester United target Diop this summer. (The People, June 16). Meanwhile, West Ham asked about Anthony Martial after being contacted by United about a player-plus-cash deal for Diop (Daily Mail, June 19).

Declan Rice - The England international feels a move to Old Trafford this summer would be too early in his career (The Independent, June 20); West Ham have told United they have no intention of selling Rice this summer (Sky Sports News, June 19).

Philippe Coutinho - The Brazilian could make a shock return to Liverpool this summer (Le 10 Sport, June 21); The former Liverpool winger says he will not join United out of respect to his former club (Sky Sports News, June 17).

Youri Tielemans - United have made a £36m bid for the Monaco midfielder (The Sun, June 18); The club have made further enquiries into signing Tielemans. (Mail, June 16); The Leicester midfielder says he is flattered by links with Tottenham and Manchester United (Sky Sports News, June 6).

Harry Maguire - Man City look to have beaten United to the signing of Maguire by pencilling his medical into the diary (Daily Star, June 20); Andreas Pereira could be used as a makeweight to facilitate Maguire's move (The Sun, June 18); United are growing increasingly confident of winning the race to sign Maguire in light of Manchester City's reluctance to pay over £80m for the England international. (Daily Mail, June 15); United have not been put off by Leicester's sky high asking price of £90m (London Evening Standard, June 13).
Aaron Wan-Bissaka - United must pay £45m upfront for the right back as Crystal Palace demand what Man City spent on Kyle Walker transfer (the Sun, June 22). United are yet to make an improved bid for the player, but are expected to soon (Sky Sports News, June 20); United are holding further talks with Palace this weekend aimed at agreeing a fee for Wan-Bissaka (The Sun, June 16); Wan-Bissaka favours a move to United but is not forcing through an exit from Palace. (Sky Sports News, June 14); United are preparing to make a second improved bid for Bissaka after having their initial £40m bid rejected. (Sky Sports News, June 14).

Technical director - Rio Ferdinand admits he is interested in becoming Manchester United's first technical director but says the role has not yet been defined by the club (Sky Sports News, June 12); Ed Woodward will continue to call the shots on the transfer policy at Manchester United, with the club not expected to appoint a sporting or technical director this summer. (Daily Mail, June 12).

Toby Alderweireld - Ole Gunnar Solskjaer will try and sign Toby Alderweireld if Manchester United miss out on landing Matthijs de Ligt. (Daily Express, June 9).

Matthijs de Ligt - United are now believed to have withdrawn their interest (Sky Sports News, May 26).

Kevin Strootman - United are one of several clubs who have been offered the player on loan (Sky Sports News, May 25).

Joao Felix - Manchester United have been joined by rivals Manchester City in the £105m race for Benfica wonderkid (The Sun, May 30); City and United are in fact locked in £120m battle for the youngster (Daily Express, June 4).

Giovani Lo Celso - United have emerged as favourites ahead of Tottenham to sign Real Betis playmaker Giovani Lo Celso, who is valued at £67m by the La Liga club. (The Independent, June 15).

Sean Longstaff - United are thought to be interested, but no approach has been made (Sky Sports News, June 17); United are confident they can reach a £25m agreement with Newcastle for midfielder Sean Longstaff. (Daily Mirror, June 15).

Gareth Bale - Bale is no longer one of Manchester United's transfer targets this summer as 'both his age and the salary he commands means he does not fit the transfer profile the club are pursuing' (Sky Sports News, June 13).

Ivan Perisic - The Croatian will be allowed to leave Inter this summer for a fee of around £35m. There has previously been interest in Perisic from Manchester United and Arsenal, but as yet no bid has been submitted by a Premier League club. (Sport Italia, June 14).

Antoine Griezmann - Manchester United have been blindsided in their bid to sign Griezmann as he is expected to join Barcelona for £110m. (Mirror, June 16); United have made a last-ditch £95m bid to convince the French striker to join the club instead of making a move, as expected, to Barcelona (The Sun, June 13).

CONFIRMED: Daniel James - The Wales winger has completed his transfer to United from Swansea on a five-year contract.

Jan Oblak - Atletico Madrid goalkeeper Jan Oblak wants to leave the club this summer and is interested in a move to Manchester United (ESPN, June 11).

Rodri - Manchester United are willing to match Manchester City and pay £62m Atletico Madrid midfielder Rodri (Daily Star, June 11).

Donny van de Beek - Ajax midfielder Donny van de Beek wants a move to the Premier League to join either Manchester United or Tottenham (Daily Star, June 11).

Gianluigi Donnarumma - To fall in line with FFP, AC Milan may have to cash in on Gigi Donnarumma this summer with a fee in the region of £60m being quoted (Calciomercato, June 8); Manchester United have reportedly launched a move for AC Milan goalkeeper. (Daily Star, June 2).

Ryan Sessegnon - United made contact with Fulham about the 19-year-old in May; Sessegnon has now told Fulham he will not be signing a new contract offered to him by the club (Sky Sports News, June 7).

Nicolas Pepe - The Lille winger is set to snub interest from several Premier League heavyweights and sign for Bayern Munich. Liverpool, Arsenal and Manchester United were all credited with interest in the 24-year-old (The Sun, June 8)

James Maddison - Manchester United are said to have made signing the Leicester forward 'their new priority' and 'moved into pole position' to sign the 22-year-old. Maddison is expected to cost £60m if he leaves Leicester this summer (The Independent, June 4).

Mo Salah - Red to Red Devil? United are reportedly set for a £180m battle with Real Madrid and Bayern Munich for Salah's signature (Daily Mail, June 4).

Mauro Icardi - United have reportedly been offered Icardi by Inter Milan, but have decided against making a move (Sky in Italy).

Kalidou Koulibaly - Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has identified £84m Napoli defender Kalidou Koulibaly as his prime transfer target this summer (Daily Mail, June 9).
