
Harry Potter Wizards Unite: Pokmon Go for the Potterverse is released on Friday
Everything you need to know about the next big augmented-reality game before its 21 June release date
Jay Castello


Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.00BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.48BST


Harry Potter: Wizards Unite will bring a little magic into the world tomorrow, as fans will be able to step into the world of the Boy Who Lived thanks to the augmented-reality smartphone game.
Players use their phones to tackle something called the Calamity, which has tossed all sorts of dangerous magic  Confoundables  into the everyday world of muggles. Exploring the real world around them, theyll run into familiar forms for fans of the Potterverse, such as pixies guarding screaming Howler letters or Hogwarts students trapped by vines. Casting spells on them by tracing lines on the phones screen will send them back where they belong, adding to the players collection of magical objects fished from the streets.
Anybody who ever headed out to hunt critters in Niantics previous mega-hit, Pokmon Go, will see the similarities in Wizards Unite. Pokstops, for instance, become Inns, where you can gather spellcasting energy rather than Pokballs.
After levelling a few times, players will be asked whether they want to become an Auror, a magical zoologist, or a professor. Each path has its own skills that you can develop as you continue to play. Some skills are focused on you as an individual, for example improving the way that you explore the map, says Alex Moffit, a producer at developer Niantic. But a lot of the skills that I think are most interesting involve collaboration  I can actually cast abilities on my fellow witches and wizards, help heal them, give them a boost.
Wizards Unite does some things new, some things old, some things better, says Moffit. One of these things is the ability to brew potions, which will give you advantages in tough fights. You can find ingredients by walking around, and they will vary based on your location and even the weather conditions, or you can grow them in greenhouses scattered around the world.
Of course, as in Pokmon Go, you can also buy energy, potions, and other things like cosmetics using real money. Spending is never obligatory, but how easy the game is to play will depend on how packed your home neighbourhood is with Inns or other encounters. One journalist at this weeks preview event in LA ran out of spellcasting energy even in the bustling Universal Studios, where Inns and encounters were clustered so that several of each were within reach. However, the game is nowhere near as money-grubbing as last years Harry Potter: Hogwarts Mystery.
Youll probably need to use potions  brewed or bought  to tackle the games tougher challenges. The toughest in the game are fortresses and, like Pokmon Gos raid battles, youll need to group together with other players to attempt them. Some encounters are trickier than others, and may not be possible at all until youve levelled up a bit. Sometimes enemies will fight back, and youll need to cast Protego or fail. Rarer encounters also drop hints about the plot, which Moffit envisions running for 10 years, though at the moment its abstract and ready to change, shift and react based on fan feedback.
Three years after its launch, Pokmon Go maintains a dedicated community of 