
UK arms sales to Saudi Arabia unlawful, court of appeal declares
Ruling prompts government to suspend new arms sales to Saudi Arabia while it urgently reviews its processes

Dan Sabbagh


Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.52BST


First published on Thu 20 Jun 2019 10.13BST


British arms sales to Saudi Arabia have been declared unlawful by the court of appeal because ministers failed to properly assess their contribution to civilian casualties in indiscriminate bombing in Yemen.
The unexpected ruling prompted the British government to suspend new arms sales to Saudi Arabia while it urgently reviews its processes  although Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, said the government would also seek to appeal. 
The appeal court judges had been asked by Campaign Against Arms Trade whether the sales of arms to Saudi Arabia for use in the Yemini civil war was in breach of its own international humanitarian law guidance.
They concluded that the decision making process was wrong in law in one significant respect and told Fox to launch an immediate review following repeated concern that British licensed bombs are killing civilians in Yemen.
Announcing the courts decision, Sir Terence Etherton, the master of the rolls, said the government made no concluded assessments of whether the Saudi-led coalition had committed violations of international humanitarian law in the past, during the Yemen conflict, and made no attempt to do so.
Etherton, sitting alongside Lord Justice Irwin and Lord Justice Singh, said ministers must now reconsider its arms sales approval process and must then estimate the future risks of breaches to international humanitarian law in light of their conclusions about the past.
Shortly after the ruling Fox made an emergency statement to the Commons and confirmed that the government would seek to appeal. We are carefully considering the implications of the judgment for decision-making, Fox told MPs.
While we do this, we will not grant any new licences for export to Saudi Arabia and its coalition partners which might be used in the conflict in Yemen, the minister added.
Later, Fox was understood to be privately telling MPs that he expected the review process called for by the court would take about 10 weeks  and would not lead to any of the previous licensing decisions be overturned.
Arms trade campaigners say that Paveway, Brimstone and Storm Shadow bombs of the type used by the Saudis in Yemen are covered by separate open licences, which have not been suspended by Fox, and are only under review. The bombs will continue, one source added.
Arms export licensing decisions of the type held to be unlawful are made by the international trade secretary on the advice the foreign secretary, a post currently held by Jeremy Hunt and previously by Boris Johnson.
Earlier this month it had emerged that Johnson had recommended that the UK allow Saudi Arabia to buy bomb parts expected to be deployed in Yemen, days after an airstrike on a potato factory in the country had killed 14 people in 2016. 
Labour called for a full parliamentary or public inquiry into arms sales to Saudi. Party leader Jeremy Corbyn added: UK advice, assistance and arms supplies to Saudis war in Yemen is a moral stain on our country. Arms sales to Saudi must stop now.
Lloyd Russell-Moyle, a Labour backbench MP who was in court for the ruling, blamed past and present British foreign secretaries and other ministers for ignoring the evidence of civilian casualties.
Focusing on the Tory 