
The answer to the UKs homelessness crisis is painfully simple: give people homes


Tue 18 Jun 2019 15.35BST


Last modified on Tue 18 Jun 2019 18.00BST


I was just 15 years old when the 2007-08 financial crash hit  but I remember it like it was yesterday. I can replay in my mind the bankers leaving Lehman Brothers for the last time. I can see the lines of people waiting to withdraw their savings from Northern Rock. But the image that has stuck with me more than any other is the encampments of people in America  living out of cars, in tents and under bridges  having been evicted from their homes after the subprime mortgage crisis.
I knew things were bad in the UK  I knew they might even get worse. But I vividly remember thinking: at least we are not the US.
Fast-forward 10 years and I am feeling much less confident. A decade of austerity has torn gaping holes in our social safety net. We have had the slowest recovery in wages since the Napoleonic wars. Poverty is now rising again among young and old alike. And our public services are at breaking point, with many struggling to access the support they need. However, the most visible and distressing sign that our country has taken a turn for the worse is the rise in homelessness we see all around us.
According to official numbers, rough sleeping has increased by 165% since 2010. As a result, the image I once associated so powerfully with the US has now become commonplace in the UK. An investigation by the Guardian finds that the number of homeless camps forcibly removed by councils has more than trebled in five years. Tents, cardboard structures and a garden shed are among the items confiscated by local councils in these evictions. And this is just the tip of the homelessness iceberg: the number of people in temporary accommodation or sofa-surfing far exceeds those currently on the street.
All these statistics tell us what we already knew from our daily commute or trip to the supermarket: we are now facing a homelessness crisis in this country.
The US is expanding legally sanctioned camps, allowing people to stay permanently and creating formal governance
The causes of this crisis are no mystery. The UK faces a severe shortage of housing  with the huge drop in social housing since the 1980s forcing people into the private rented sector. This has seen housing costs rise while their tenure security and access to support has declined. Meanwhile, stagnant wages and the botched rollout of universal credit  at the same time as deep welfare cuts  has meant that peoples incomes have just not kept pace with their cost of living. The result: more than 169 evictions every day from the private rented sector, making it by far the biggest cause of the rise in homelessness in the UK.
Luckily, there is now a recognition among both main political parties that we have to do something about this issue. The question is what?
The US points towards one potential solution. Far from being a short-term effect of the financial crisis, tent cities in the US have become a permanent feature of the landscape  with growing conurbations of homeless people in most major urban areas. In Seattle, they have come up with a novel response to this crisis. They 