
Giulio Regeni's parents demand Italy recall Cairo ambassador
Family of researcher say Egypt is preventing investigations into Regenis death

Ruth Michaelson in Cairo


Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.40BST


The family of the Italian doctoral student Giulio Regeni, who was murdered in Egypt in 2016, are demanding that Rome withdraw its ambassador to Cairo for a second time, in response to what they say is Egyptian pressure on their lawyers and efforts to prevent investigation into their sons death.
Enough is enough, Paola and Claudio Regeni said in a joint statement with their lawyer, Alessandra Ballerini. The withdrawal of the Italian ambassador from Cairo can no longer be postponed.
Italy recalled its ambassador in April 2016, in objection to Egypts unwillingness to cooperate with an investigation into the murder of the 28-year-old.
Regenis mutilated body was found on an outlying Cairo desert highway in February that year after he disappeared eight days earlier while researching trade unions in Egypt. An Italian autopsy found his corpse bore the hallmarks of torture, amid widespread suspicions Egyptian officials were responsible.
An Italian ambassador returned to Egypt in August 2017, in an effort to reinforce judicial cooperation and as a consequence the search for the truth, according to then foreign minister, Angelino Alfano.
But in the two years since, Italian officials have accused their Egyptian counterparts of impeding their investigation, and of failing to provide vital evidence that could show how Regeni disappeared and who was responsible for his death. The Regeni family and Ballerini said the Egyptian authorities were instead focused on intimidating their legal team in Cairo.
This is an outrageous and disturbing attitude, the joint statement said. At this point, the only possible step is to withdraw the ambassador.
A spokesman for the Egyptian ministry of foreign affairs repeatedly declined to respond when contacted by the Guardian to ask about the Regenis demand.
Maha Ahmed, of the Cairo-based Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms, is under investigation and risks imprisonment, according to the ECRF. The commission tracks enforced disappearances like Regenis, while some of their employees act as the Regeni familys Egyptian legal counsel.
With Maha, they are repeating the same scenario as Amal Fathy, said Mohammed Lotfy, executive director of ECRF. Lotfys wife, Amal Fathy, was arrested during a dawn raid at their home last May, and imprisoned until December, accused of a range of charges including spreading false news and membership of a terrorist group.
Lotfy and the ECRF believe the Egyptian authorities are seeking to prevent them from working on the Regeni case by intimidating ECRF employees and their family members. I think the message is clear: take your hands off the case or else youll get hurt, said Lotfy, adding that Ahmeds husband, Mohammed Helw, is one of the ECRF lawyers granted power of attorney by the Regeni family.
The ECRF researcher Ibrahim Ezz El Din was also forcibly disappeared a week ago. A team headed by the Egyptian National Security Agency official Sherif Magdy Abdel Al arrested a second lawyer, Haitham Mohamedeen, on 13 May. Abdel Al is one of five Egyptian NSA members named by Italian prosecutors last November as suspects in Regenis disappearance.
Italian officials are continuing to maintain pressure on Egypt. Giulios parents will not be alone, wrote the Ppresident of the Italian parliament, Roberto Fico, in a statement on Facebook. Next week we will talk about Giulio with the German Bundestag: Giulio was not in fact just an Italian 