
The Five Star experiment has failed us. Now Italy needs real political change
The upstart populist party promised to pioneer digital politics and focus on the environment. But weve seen none of that 


Wed 12 Jun 2019 06.00BST


Last modified on Tue 18 Jun 2019 08.53BST


In the recent European parliament elections, the two Italian parties that make up western Europes first fully fledged populist government confirmed they could still count on 50% of the vote. But the shocking news was that within the coalition, support for the anti-establishment Five Star Movement halved to 17%, while the far-right League doubled its share to 34% and became the dominant player in Italian politics.
Italy has in many ways been a laboratory for the political crisis that has swept across Europe
How could Five Star, which had successfully pioneered new ways of doing internet-based politics, fall so heavily and quickly? Will the League last? How much damage can the illusion of taking back control do to a country so dependent on international markets to finance its huge public debt? And more important, what will be left of Italys hopes when Italians find themselves burning one political formula after the other with no sign of reversal in a 20-year decline?
Im often asked these questions by observers of Italian politics who increasingly worry that Italys dysfunction may be contagious to other western democracies. Theyre the same questions I ask myself when I stroll around Trastevere, the Rome neighbourhood where I live with my family.
Trastevere is the heart of the Eternal City. It is the only part of the city to have been continuously inhabited since the Roman empire. Film directors from Woody Allen to Federico Fellini have become enamoured with its ivy-clad walls and narrow, cobblestone streets. But for all the glitz and glamour celebrated by the silver screen, todays sobering reality is that too much rubbish and too many cars have made Romes great beauty unrecognisable.
This was all supposed to change after the last mayoral elections in 2016, when the neighbourhood (which happens to be the traditional cradle of the Communist partys Rome branch) voted overwhelmingly for Virginia Raggi, the Five Star candidate. I myself had welcomed her election, as a promising break from the political cycle that had swung between centre-left and centre-right coalitions for the past three decades without any of Romes, or the countrys, structural problems being solved.
Three years on, the big disappointment is that nothing has changed. Yes, a series of scandals forced several of Raggis aides to resign. And yes, at a national level Italian media continue to broadcast a never-ending saga that features new stars who rapidly and disappointingly burn out. But what strikes me most is how powerless politics seems to have become in shaping daily lives.
One of Five Stars best initial intuitions was that the environment could become a compelling political narrative, and that innovation could be the route to a better world. You might have expected that at least some restrictions would be imposed on the use of privately owned, fossil-fuel-powered vehicles, especially in a city where a person spends on average 227 hours in a car each year, according to one study. Thats more than twice the figure for any other major Italian city. It would have been logical for a party betting heavily on green innovation to encourage a massive shift to smaller vehicles, to partner with 