
Catch-22: has George Clooney broken the curse of the unfilmable novel?
Its a modern American classic, but Joseph Hellers fractured story has defied suitable translation on to the screen  until now

Stuart Heritage


Thu 20 Jun 2019 08.08BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 09.23BST


Fans of the unfilmable novel must be having a terrible time of it now. In the last three weeks alone, two of the most notorious examples have made their way to screen. Admittedly one  Amazons Good Omens  functions as a pretty watertight argument for never trying to adapt an unfilmable book. But the other is Catch-22, and that functions as an equally watertight argument to the contrary.
I have to admit that I didnt see this coming. Throughout its gestation, the Catch-22 series seemed like an almighty act of hubris; as if Hulu, still drunk on the success of The Handmaids Tale, went out of its way to adapt an even more knotty work. Catch-22s unfilmable reputation came about in part because someone did try to film it once, in the form of Mike Nicholls 1970 feature, and the results were patchy at best. A similar fate of smug, too wacky mediocrity seemed inevitable.
And yet somehow they have pulled it off. The Catch-22 series is successful in almost every way. It is beautifully shot, thoughtfully written and incredibly well acted. It takes plenty of liberties with Joseph Hellers book  there are approximately 25 fewer characters, almost no flashbacks and the ending is entirely different  but, having seen the series, I have come to the conclusion that these changes are exactly what make it sing.
Ill try to stay clear of spoiler territory, but the biggest decision made by the film-makers was to break the book apart and put it back together in the right order. The book hops about all over the place, leaping from viewpoint to viewpoint and back and forth through time. Its a terrific sleight-of-hand  when Heller decides to fill in the blanks caused by this literary restlessness, it comes as a punch in the guts  but it would have made for an incredibly annoying TV show.
Instead, the series takes its time to wear down its protagonist, bombardier John Yossarian (Christopher Abbott). His downfall is parcelled out carefully along the way, and each new attempt to escape his fate brings about new and awful consequences. By the time he is finally broken, it has a feeling of inevitability that wasnt present in the novel. It also reinforces the notion that Yossarian is a classic antihero, rather than a sane innocent trapped in a world of madness. Every time he tries to wriggle free of his commitments, he causes something terrible to happen to someone else. When this happened in the book, everything was rationalised through prose. Without that safety net, Yossarian quite often just comes off as a dick. Perversely, this makes him a little easier to understand.
Speaking of prose, another smart decision was to avoid Hellers tone as often as possible. The book is a smashed Rubiks cube, full of repetition, circular reasoning and busted logic. All the characters are trapped by their own thought patterns, which is fun to read but  as anyone who has watched every episode of the tonally similar W1A can attest  can be brutal to sit through. It still happens here and there, 