
Labour has only one realistic option on Brexit  back remain
Contact author


Tue 18 Jun 2019 09.59BST


Last modified on Tue 18 Jun 2019 19.38BST


With the Conservatives ready to seal an electoral pact with Nigel Farage, British politics has become a battle of cultures and beliefs. At the same time, as Labours shadow cabinet was forced to accept last week, we are now seeing a four-way fragmentation of the party system.
As a result, at some time between now and its September conference, the Labour party is likely to commit unconditionally to a remain/reform position on Europe. Whether via a second referendum, or  which looks more likely  a snap election, Labours task is to become the leading force within a progressive majority that wants to stop no deal, defend parliamentary democracy and halt the Trumpification of politics.
But it wont be easy. A significant number of pro-Corbyn activists have convinced themselves that the demand for a second referendum is simply a weapon invented by Blairites to destroy the leader. Meanwhile, among a group of Labour MPs in former industrial constituencies and their voters and activists, there is no appetite for a second referendum that could sour an already bitter political atmosphere in their communities.
But the change must happen, and those like me, who have advocated it, have the duty to explain the risks, the penalties, and how they could be overcome.
Jeremy Corbyns attempt to deflect the cultural polarisation around Brexit by pulling voters towards a radical economic agenda was admirable  but it has failed.
It will no longer work while the Brexit issue dominates the debate. For every voter Labour is currently losing to Farage, it loses four to the Greens, Liberal Democrats or left nationalist parties. That was the evidence presented to the shadow cabinet.
Those within the Labour hierarchy still resisting change suggest that, if it flips now to remain, the party will test the loyalty of the so-called Labour leave voters, who have stuck with the party on the grounds that it respects the referendum result. Meanwhile, because remain votes pile up in big cities, even if it claws many remainers back, thats not enough to compensate in the crucial marginal seats.
I have to admit this risk is real. But lets consider the alternatives. If the incoming Tory leader tries, yet again, to put the old withdrawal agreement to parliament before 31 October, and if Labour was prepared to offer a free vote to MPs such as Caroline Flint, Gareth Snell and Lisa Nandy, a softish Brexit might be achieved, and two-party politics (in England at least) might reappear.
The problem is, for the Labour MPs who want to vote for a deal, a free vote is not enough. They need Labour to be able to take the credit for sorting Brexit out. But what looks like credit in Wigan looks like blame in Bristol, so there is no chance of persuading Labours leaders to put their fingerprints on a deal. Another alternative would be for Labour to begin a long summer listening exercise, letting its remain wing  Starmer, Watson, the Welsh and Scottish Labour parties and the Love Socialism Hate Brexit group  do its own thing while Corbyns inner team focuses on avoiding the issue.
That would ensure the September party conference was a bloodbath. The only way the membership could be stopped from overturning the present line would 