
Four reasons why Trump is cruising toward re-election
Democrats should not delude themselves: unless they shape up  and fast  the president is heading for four more years
Contact author


Thu 20 Jun 2019 12.05BST


First published on Thu 20 Jun 2019 07.00BST


On Tuesday night Donald Trump launched his re-election campaign with a by now classic rally in Orlando, Florida. It was a greatest hits rally in which he accused the Democrats of undermining democracy (by trying to impeach him), talked about the many threats to this country as we know it, and even railed against Hillary Clinton (for old times sake). In short, Trumps message for 2020 is: I made America great again, now vote for me so I can Keep America Great.
Democrats will dismiss the speech as lacking ideas and just fearmongering, while reveling in recent polls that have virtually every major primary candidate defeat Trump in 2020, sometimes by a significant margin. They believe the president is weakened by a broad range of issues, including the Mueller report, the treatment of immigrants at the southern border and the various scandals surrounding key cabinet members.
Remarkably, given the traumatic experience of 2016, many Democrats have still not learned the key lesson of US democracy: elections are not won by passive majorities but by mobilized minorities. And while the passive majority might be with the Democrats, or at least not with Trump, the mobilized minority is. There are (at least) four reasons why, at this moment, Trump is cruising towards re-election.
The first reason is, of course, the economy. While we can argue about how meaningful and solid the current economic growth is, there is no denying that, in terms of the conventional economic indicators, the state of the US economy is excellent. Consequently, prediction models based primarily on economic indicators, which correctly predicted the 2016 elections, predict a resounding Trump victory in 2020.
Second, Trump has so far delivered to his non-traditional base. The average Republican, commonly referred to as the moderate Republican, is still not a fan of Trump, who is seen as too confrontational and vulgar, but got the one thing they care about: a tax cut. Scared of a socialist backlash within the Democratic party, they will come out to protect their new gains by voting Trump.
Similarly, the Christian right will once again come out strong. While the support for Trump by religious voters puzzles liberals, it is pretty straightforward: the supreme court. Here, again, Trump has delivered. He has appointed two staunchly conservative anti-abortion judges to the supreme court, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh, and promised to appoint more. And with the possibility of (at least) one position possibly becoming vacant in the next presidential term, ie Ruth Bader Ginsburg (perhaps also Clarence Thomas), the Christian right mobilization will run on full cylinders again. The reward for the faithful: overturning Roe v Wade!
Finally, there is the real Trump supporter, the mostly blue-collar and lower-middle-class white voters who want to build the wall (nativism) and drain the swamp (populism). So far, they have not really gotten what they wanted. The swamp has barely been drained  rather, it has been expanded by corrupt Trump appointees  while, despite all of Trumps grandstanding, the wall is still mostly a fence-in-building. In short, the real Trump voter is left wanting  as is at times loudly proclaimed by their media voices like Ann 