Surreal Gag Moe Robot Anime X Maiden Planned for Niconico
posted on 2014-01-14 04:00 UTC-8 by Crystalyn Hodgkins
Series of 3D anime shorts about battle with aliens to stream for free

The new anime, game, and pachinko design company Lambert is developing a surreal gag 3D anime series titled X Maiden. 
Niconico will stream the "moe robot" series of anime shorts for free.

The show takes place in the year 20XX C.E., when a mysterious alien race named "Firow" suddenly appear on Earth. 
The Firow's dreadful attacks force humanity to engage in a difficult battle. 
But humanity's last hope, the X Maiden who wear weapons built to destroy the Firow, are about to set out. 

The cast includes:
Maaya Uchida as Jun Akamaru, a 15-year-old bright and energetic girl. 
She has a fear of strangers to the point of getting sweaty palms, but she is oddly always full of confidence.
MAKO as Wanderlei Zillminnko, a 15-year-old optimistic girl who is the type of person 
who is in such high spirits that she ends up accidentally breaking things in the classroom.
Yuko Iida as Aoi Tachibana, a 15-year-old girl who plays the "straight man" to everyone else, 
especially to Jun and Zill. 
She is a secret fujoshi whose shelves are lined with boys-love manga.
Yuiko Tatsumi as Midori Hagino, a 15-year-old girl from Kansai who is very shy. 
She loves reading books about everything, from love to the occult.
Sayuri Yahagi as Matsuri Yukino, the 25-year-old superior to Jun and the chief of the secret base. 
She is straight-laced and old fashioned, but she is also a bit of an airhead.
Youko Honda as Harumi Tamaki, the 25-year-old owner of the Tamaki bar. 
She is an energetic and reliable waitress who is old friends with Matsuri.
Mutsumi Tamura as Virgo, a 17-year-old alien from the "Firow" race who threaten mankind. 
She works part-time at the Tamaki bar. 
She is a brave and good girl who works very hard and is constantly confused by the cultural differences between her kind and humanity.
Mami Noda as Croix, a six-year-old cat who is an older-sister type who is very good at taking care of others. 
She often speaks with Virgo when she is taking breaks from her work at the bar.

The show's official website lists that the show is currently in production.

Lambert was founded on January 23, 2009 by Hiroshi Matsuda, and is located in Taito City in Tokyo. 
The company is currently accepting applications for a MAYA designer, a planner/director, 
a motion graphics designer, an animation director/producer, and part-time staff. 
According to a job listing on CG World, the company currently has 20 staff members with an average age of 28.

The job listing also notes that the company is also producing a short anime series titled Cook no Fuwari, 
about a dog and its owner and the recipes they create together.

Reed Expo's 3rd Japan Licensing event, which was held last year, also lists that Lambert is looking to create computer games, 
pachinko machines, cell phone and web applications, and other publications for X Maiden, and is looking into creating toys, 
apparel, accessories, household articles, food, drinks, cell phone and web applications, and other publications for Cook no Fuwari.
