Shell Q3 underlying profit beats all forecasts

 LONDON  (Reuters) - Royal Dutch Shell beat forecasts with a 21 percent rise in underlying third-quarter profit thanks to high oil prices, but the oil major's headline earnings fell as the corresponding period last year benefited from gains on asset sales. 

 The results raised investor hopes that the Anglo-Dutch company has turned the corner after two tough years, and pushed its London-listed A shares up 3.3 percent to 1,848 pence by 0942 GMT, outperforming a 0.7 percent rise in the DJ Stoxx European oil and gas sector index. The rise pushed Shell's market capitalization to $229 billion, displacing BP Plc as the world's second-largest fully publicly quoted oil company by market value. Shell said on Thursday that third-quarter current cost of supply (CCS) net profit, which strips out changes in the value of inventories, was $6.9 billion. This was down 4 percent on the same period of 2005 when divestment gains added $1.7 billion to the result. Excluding inventory losses and non-operating items such as asset sales and deferred taxes, net profit was $7 billion. A Reuters poll of 11 analysts had given an average forecast of $5.7 billion, with the highest at $6 billion. The 21 percent rise in underlying profits compares with a 16 percent fall at BP Plc. July to September was the third straight quarter when Shell comfortably beat earnings forecasts. The results prompted Citigroup analyst Jonathan Wright to hint Shell shares could go from trading at a discount to BP shares, on a price-earnings basis, to a premium. "There is a case building for Shell to at least close the valuation gap," Wright said in a research note. Investor confidence was knocked by massive oil and gas reserves downgrades in 2004 and huge cost overruns on key projects in 2005. STRONG PRODUCTION Profit was helped by oil prices, which hit a record average high in the third quarter, but production also beat forecasts. Shell managed to hold oil and gas output steady at 3.25 million barrels of oil equivalent per day (boepd) in the quarter, despite losing 185,000 boepd to civil strife in the Niger delta. Analysts had forecast 3.146 million boepd. Refining and marketing profits also came in much stronger than expected, rising around 25 percent, excluding inventory gains, despite lower refining margins. Profits on trading oil and gas also rose. Chief Executive Jeroen van der Veer said Shell had also kept a tight rein on costs, reassuring those who feared costs at its largest project at Sakhalin Island in East Russia were rising again after it doubled its cost estimate last year to $20 billion. It said the project budget of $20 billion figure still stood. Many industry figures had thought a $22 billion figure was now more likely, while some reports said costs had spiraled to $28 billion. (Additional reporting by Louise Heavens and  Mark Potter )