How exactly could the USWNT have satisfied these whining Canadians?
One answer to that question, “score fewer than 13 goals,” can be dismissed immediately.

Even if the other groups shake out in a way that the U.S. ultimately wants — to get second in Group F for a better draw in the knockout stage (basically to avoid a quarterfinal showdown with host France) — no team wants to surrender control of where it’s headed this early.

The first two tiebreakers are goals scored and goal differential, and Tuesday’s 13-0 win over Thailand gave Sweden a tall task if it wants to hold tiebreakers against the U.S. women. Stopping at some arbitrary acceptable number of goals — what exactly is OK about nine goals that isn’t about 13? — would have been giving an opponent an unnecessary advantage in an elimination tournament and is obviously the wrong thing to do.

Alex Morgan (l.) comforts Thailand's Miranda Nild after the U.S. 13-0 romp in World Cup opener.
Alex Morgan (l.) comforts Thailand's Miranda Nild after the U.S. 13-0 romp in World Cup opener. (Alessandra Tarantino / Associated Press)
That brings us to the celebrations, which brings us to this clip of Canadian broadcasters that leads with “If you’re going to blow away a team, do it with humility, and they did not,” and only gets more unbearable from there.

???? Canada was not impressed by the #USWNT today. Clare Rustad, Kaylyn Kyle, and Diana Matheson rip Rapinoe and Morgan for what they call "classless behavior". #FIFAWWC pic.twitter.com/2U3eVCFb2M

The TSN commentators helpfully laid out the rules: someone scoring their first World Cup goal, like Mallory Pugh, can celebrate, but a veteran scorer like Alex Morgan (who had exactly three non-penalty goals in her three prior World Cups) can’t. Actually, Morgan can celebrate, but not like that, counting out the goals on her fingers, which Clare Rustad called “disgraceful.”

ESPN’s Bomani Jones has said for years that “Sportsmanship is people trying to stop somebody from hurting their own feelings;” I’ve always felt that big shows of respect on the field, whether fans doing a pity clap for a last-place runner or athletes silently putting their heads down after a goal, are incredibly condescending to the opponent.

One group of people who agree: fans of Thailand. A Thai television commentator told the New York Times that “This is a game of teamwork. Once you score a goal, of course you have to celebrate.”

If a 13-0 scoreline really bothers you — and as a television product, that’s hard to argue with — there are plenty of people to blame. Start with FIFA, which has created a tournament that is both too swollen to maintain quality but not big enough to maintain drama before the knockout stage.

A 24-team group stage means that 36 games will be played to eliminate just eight teams; some fluff is inevitable there. A 13-0 blowout is more entertaining than two teams dribbling around with advancement assured.

And if there aren’t 23 teams in the world capable of staying within two touchdowns of the United States, FIFA and federations like Thailand’s deserve blame for that, too, for failing to fund and develop the sport.

Alex Morgan could add that one up on one hand.