Kim Kardashian finds Kanye West 'exhausting' and 'overwhelming'
Even Kim Kardashian is having trouble taking “Mercy” on Kanye West amid his latest tirade.
The reality TV star found her husband’s blabbering this week “exhausting” and “overwhelming,” a source close to Kardashian told People mag.
First, West told the crowd at a Monday open-mic event in Chicago that he’s moving back to the Windy City, where he was raised. But his Los Angeles-area based wife and kids reportedly won’t follow him there full-time. And then on Thursday, the rapper ranted that his wife never dated Drake, despite the rumors, and addressed beef with Nick Cannon and Tyson Beckford in a series of Instagram videos.
The back-to-back outbursts reportedly didn’t set well with Kardashian.
“Kanye has always been like this,” a source told People. “He has a million things on his mind that he wants to accomplish and create. Although one can see it as being very passionate, it can still be overwhelming for Kim.” 
The source added: “She doesn’t necessarily love when people now keep asking her if she is moving to Chicago and she has to explain to everyone what’s going on. It can be exhausting.”
West’s planned move to Chicago itself isn’t stressing out Kardashian, 37, since the couple has “had a long distance marriage in the past,” the source says. But a different source affiliated with West, 41, told People that the Instagram rants indicate he’s lost his focus and his mind is constantly changing.
“It’s happening again,” the West source said. “Late night texts, and he’s all over the place. He’s not sleeping a lot at night, just a few hours per night, and he’s go go go. But he’s not making a lot of sense...He’s moving to Chicago. No, he’s working on new music. No, he’s doing some sort of memorial to his mom. He’s focusing on Kim and the kids. He’s withdrawing. He wants to be social. It never stops. He’s not focused right now.” 
Part of West’s Thursday rants stemmed from a Complex interview in which Cannon said he didn’t think it was “far off of a concept” that Kardashian and Drake hooked up. “First of all I want to address Nick Cannon,” West said in one video. “I understand that you used to date my wife, but you know, you get into an interview, don’t mention my wife.”
West — known for hits like “Gold Digger,” “Stronger” and “Mercy” — then turned his attention to Drake, saying, “The fact that it’s people making rumors or thinking that you f---ed my wife and you’re not saying nothing and you carrying it like that, that don’t sit well with my spirit.”
Beckford didn’t escape West’s wrath either. The model once dissed Kardashian’s body, commenting on a photo of her, “I don’t care for it personally.”
So West demanded Thursday, “As far as Tyson Beckford goes, don’t speak on my wife, bro. Like none of y’all speak on my wife period. What is you talking about? I’m married. We’re in love, we’re a family.”

