GATE Anime's Season 2 Promo Video Previews Opening Song
posted on 2015-12-28 01:30 UTC-8 by Kyle Hallmark

Warner Bros. began streaming a promotional video for the second season of the 
GATE (Gate: Jieitai Kanochi nite, Kaku Tatakaeri) anime on Saturday. 
The video features the opening theme song "GATE II ~Sekai o Koete~" (GATE II ~Surpass the World~) 
by Kishida Kyodan & The Akeboshi Rockets (Highschool of the Dead, Strike the Blood), 
who also performed the first season's opening theme.

The second season will premiere on January 9 at 1:05 a.m. on Tokyo MX TV, 
and it will also air on MBS, TV Aichi, BS11, and AT-X.

The official website of the anime revealed a key visual for the anime earlier this month.

Voice actresses Hisako Kanemoto (Tuka Luna Marceau), Nao Toyama (Lelei la Lelena), 
and Risa Taneda (Rory Mercury) will return to perform the as-yet untitled ending theme song as their characters. 
The singles for both the opening and ending themes will go on sale on January 27.

The anime's 12th episode had revealed in September that the anime would return in January. 
The anime's second half will cover the "Flame Dragon Arc" of Takumi Yanai's original light novel series.

The military fantasy series begins when a gate appears in Tokyo's Ginza district sometime in the 21st century. 
From the gate pours out monsters, knights from middle-age Europe, 
and other fantasy-like beings, 
and they kill many of the citizens of Tokyo. This event is known as the Ginza Incident.
The government sends a small group of soldiers from the Japanese Self-Defense Forces 
to the alternate world beyond the gate. 
Led by otaku soldier Yoji (voiced by Junichi Suwabe), 
they find that the villages in the world are being attacked by a dragon. 
An elf girl (Hisako Kanemoto) who is a survivor from the dragon's rampage 
joins the group in their travels across the dangerous new world.

The main staff and cast are returning from the first season. 
Takahiko Kyogoku (Love Live! School idol project) is directing the series at A-1 Pictures 
with series composition by Tatsuhiko Urahata (A-Channel, Black Bullet). 
Jun Nakai (Silver Spoon, The Sacred Blacksmith) 
is designing the characters, 
and Yoshiaki Fujisawa (Love Live! School idol project, The Eccentric Family) is composing the music. 
Yukio Nagasaki (Love Live! School idol project, Yona of the Dawn) is serving as sound director, 
and GENCO is producing the series.

Crunchyroll streamed the anime's first half as it aired and Sentai Filmworks licensed the series for North America. 
Sekai Project will release Satoru Sao's manga adaptation in North America.
