Daisuki to Stream Buddy Complex, Nisekoi, World Conquest Anime
posted on 2014-01-11 07:10 UTC-8 by Crystalyn Hodgkins
Buddy Complex gets worldwide simulcast outside of Japan

Media distribution service and retailer Daisuki announced on Friday that it will stream the 
Buddy Complex, Nisekoi, and World Conquest Zvezda Plot television anime series. 
The company will stream the Buddy Complex series worldwide outside of Japan starting on January 13 at 10:00 p.m. EST. 
Fans can watch the series on Daisuki's official website and on the company's official YouTube channel.

Daisuki will stream Nisekoi starting on January 11 at 12:00 p.m. EST in the United States, Canada, South America, and South Africa. 
Additionally, Daisuki will stream World Conquest Zvezda Plot starting on January 11 at 12:30 p.m. EST in the United States, Canada, 
South America, Africa (except for Tunisia and Algeria), Europe (except for Ireland, the United Kingdom, and France- and German-speaking areas), 
India, Russia, and the Middle East. 
New episodes of Nisekoi and World Conquest Zvezda Plot will be available weekly immediately after their original broadcast in Japan.

Sunrise's robot television anime series Buddy Complex will revolve around the friendship and coming-of-age of two boys. 
It begins with Aoba Watase, a boy who goes to high school in Tokyo and lives a carefree daily life. 
On the morning of his school's opening ceremony after summer vacation, he goes to campus as usual, but he has a chance encounter with another boy. 
The other boy's name is Jyunyou Dio Weinberg. Their encounter will soon alter the fate of the world.

The main cast includes: Yoshitsugu Matsuoka as Watase Aoba, Saori Hayami as Yumi Hara Hina, Kouki Uchiyama as Jyunyou Dio Weinberg, 
Sho Hayami as Kuramitsu Gendo, Ayumi Fujimura as Lene Kleinbeck, Tomokazu Sugita as Lee Conrad, Hiroyuki Yoshino as Jarl Duran, 
Rina Satou as Elvira Hill, Kana Hanazawa as Nasu Mayuka, Marina Inoue as Anessa Rossetti, Toshiyuki Morikawa as Alfred Gallant, 
Takahiro Sakurai as BizonGerafil, Nobunaga Shimazaki as Tarjim Vasily, Mutsumi Tamura as Lasha Hakkarainen, Yumi Uchiyama as Margaret O'Keefe.

"Hajime Yatate," the collective pen name for the Sunrise animation staffers, is credited with the original story concept. 
Yasuhiro Tanabe (episode director on Battle Spirits: Brave, Horizon in the Middle of Nowhere) is directing the series off scripts supervised by the "BC Project." 
Tomoshige Inayoshi and Asako Inayoshi are serving as both character designers and animation directors. 
Kanta Suzuki, Hiroki Tokuda, Tomohiro Kawahara, and Hiroyuki Taiga are designing the mecha. 
Tatsuya Katou is composing the music. 
True is contributing the opening theme song "Unisonia," while ChouCho is performing the ending them "Ano Sora ni Kaeru Mirai de."

The "traditional robot action" series premiered in Japan on January 5. 
Funimation is also streaming the series as it airs, although only viewers in the United States can view the videos.

Nisekoi adapts Naoshi Komi's romantic comedy manga. 
The anime revolves around Raku Ichijo (Kouki Uchiyama), a normal high school student who happens to be the heir to a yakuza group. 
The attractive but violent transfer student Chitoge Kirisaki (Nao Toyama), the heir to a rival yakuza group, transfers to his class, 
and the two must pretend to date to keep a war from breaking out between their families.

The series will also star Kana Hanazawa (Kobato., Steins;Gate) as Kosaki Onodera, Mikako Komatsu (Pretty Rhythm Rainbow Live, K) as Seishiro Tsugumi, 
Yumi Uchiyama (Binbogamiga!, The Devil is a Part-Timer!) as Ruri Miyamoto, Yuuki Kaji (Guilty Crown, Attack on Titan) as Shu Maiko, 
Takehito Koyasu (Alice in the Country of Hearts: Wonderful Wonder World, Bakuman.) as Claude, 
and Kana Asumi(Nyarko-san: Another Crawling Chaos, Pretty Rhythm Aurora Dream) as Marika Tachibana. 
Akiyuki Shinbo (MadokaMagica, Bakemonogatari) will direct the anime at animation studio SHAFT. 
Musical duo ClariS will perform the opening theme song "CLICK."

Nisekoi will premiere in Japan on January 11. 
Crunchyroll is also streaming the series in the same countries. 
Aniplex of America had announced last month that it plans to release the series on home video.

Aniplex of America describes the World Conquest anime as follows:
Every leader of the past has thought of it… but all they have done was to merely dream of its greatness.
WORLD DOMINATION…nobody has been able to achieve it. 
Until one little girl by the name of KATE HOSHIMIYA came along. KATE HOSHIMIYA will shock the world!
How was she was able to carry out such a MAGNIFICENT stunt? So FRIGHTFUL! So GLORIOUS!
Could this be…the ZVEZDA PLOT?!
Let the light of our great ZVEZDA shine upon this land far and wide!

The show will star Misaki Kuno as Kate Hoshimiya, Natsuki Hanae as Asuta Jimon, Kana Hanazawa as Professor Um, 
Erii Yamazaki as Roboko, KousukeToriumi as Yasu, Mariya Ise as Itsuka Shikabane, Minoru Hirota as Goro Shikabane, 
MAO as Renge Komadori, and Minako Kotobuki as Miki Shirasagi.

Tensai Okamura (Blue Exorcist, Darker than Black, Wolf's Rain) is directing the brand-new television anime at A-1 Pictures. 
Type-Moon's Meteo Hoshizora and Okamura are in charge of the series scripts. 
Kouhaku Kuroboshi (Allison & Lillia, Kino's Journey, Sky Girls) created the original character designs, 
and Keigo Sasaki(Blue Exorcist, Night Raid 1931) is adapting them for animation.

Tatsuya Katou (Free! - Iwatobi Swim Club, Horizon in the Middle of Nowhere, Medaka Box) is composing the music. 
Maaya Sakamoto and rock group "the band apart" perform the opening theme, while voice actress Aoi Yuki performs the ending theme.

The series will premiere in Japan on January on 11, and Crunchyroll is also streaming the series as it airs. 
Aniplex of America announced last month that it plans to release the series on home video.
