Carnivores Wiki
Carnivores (series)

Carnivores logo
Wikipedia's W.svg	Wikipedia has an article about Carnivores (series).
The Carnivores series is a series of games focusing on hunting dinosaurs and Pleistocene mammals. Carnivores, Carnivores 2, and Carnivores Ice Age were developed by Action Forms using the AtmosFear engine and were published for the PC by WizardWorks Software between 1998 and 2001; Carnivores Cityscape was developed by Sunstorm Interactive using the Serious Engine and released on the PC by Infogrames in 2002; and Carnivores: Dinosaur Hunter and Carnivores: Ice Age were developed by Tatem Games using the original Carnivores 2 and Carnivores Ice Age source code and assets and released for the iOS in 2010 and 2011.

Contents
1	Carnivores
2	Carnivores 2
3	Carnivores Ice Age
4	Carnivores Cityscape
5	Carnivores: Dinosaur Hunter
6	Carnivores: Ice Age
Carnivores
Main article: Carnivores
Carnivores was developed by Action Forms utilizing their AtmosFear game engine, and published by WizardWorks Software on November 30, 1998. Carnivores was unique at the time of its release for allowing the hunter to be hunted by animals, distinguishing it from the recent slew of Deer Hunter clones.

Carnivores 2
Main article: Carnivores 2
Carnivores 2 was developed by Action Forms utilizing their AtmosFear game engine, and published by WizardWorks Software on October 31, 2000. A Russian version was published by „@„{„u„|„|„p/Akella on December 1, 2002.

Carnivores Ice Age
Main article: Carnivores Ice Age
Carnivores Ice Age was developed by Action Forms utilizing their AtmosFear game engine, and published by WizardWorks Software on January 15, 2001.

Carnivores Cityscape
Main article: Carnivores Cityscape
Carnivores Cityscape was developed by Sunstorm Interactive utilizing the Serious Sam game engine, and published by Infogrames on March 25, 2002. Despite being canon, and many fans feeling that Carnivores Cityscape is a passable game in its own right, there is a certain amount of agreement that it doesn't fit with the rest of the Carnivores series, given its wildly divergent gameplay and the fact that a different company developed the game.

Carnivores: Dinosaur Hunter
Main article: Carnivores: Dinosaur Hunter
Carnivores: Dinosaur Hunter was developed by Tatem Games utilizing the AtmosFear game engine ported to iOS, and was released on June 12, 2010 for the iOS, and in July 2010 for PSP minis.

Carnivores: Ice Age
Main article: Carnivores: Ice Age (port)
Carnivores: Ice Age was developed by Tatem Games utilizing the AtmosFear game engine ported to iOS, and was released on February 7, 2011 for the iOS, and in August 2011 for PSP minis.