A New Climate
Have you ever thought about where your roses come from?

By Rhiannon Williams, foreign news editor, and Michelle Clifford, news correspondent


With European governments pushing to cut carbon emissions and tackle climate change, the global movement of goods by air is coming in for scrutiny.

The UK imports millions of tonnes of fresh produce every year and Kenya has long supplied our local supermarkets with fresh flowers.



Four in 10 roses in the UK come from the African nation with the vast majority flown in. 

North of Nairobi in Kenya's Rift Valley, the Oserian company employs 4,500 people to grow, pack and move one million stems each day.

Every one of those flowers is destined for Europe.

Sky News visited the vast site and spoke to the workers about their fears that demand could drop and vital jobs could be lost 



Imvulata Jepkosgei is a 24-year-old woman working as a flower grader at Oserian farms in Naivasha.

Oserian exports 100% of its flowers overseas, and 60% of them end up in the UK, particularly in supermarkets like Sainsbury's and Waitrose.

Their speciality is roses but they also grow "filler flowers" like carnations.


In peak season, they process over one million stems per day.

Oserian provides free facilities for their staff and their dependants – this is all on what they call an estate, which is a 30 minute walk from the farm.

On the estate are houses – long single-storey blocks separated into single rooms and it's one family per room.

PlayPlay
Seek


00:00
Current time01:25
Toggle Mute
Volume

Toggle Fullscreen
There are communal taps and bathrooms and water and electricity is free.

On the estate they also have a creche, primary schools and a secondary school where workers' dependants can attend for free.



They have several community halls for big events and markets where workers can buy food and clothes. The estate houses around 11,000 people – this is made up of workers and their dependents.

The area in which Oserian is located is a key hub for the flower industry – it's by a big lake and a geothermal energy source.


Oserian is trying to be carbon neutral by 2020 – they currently use 100% green energy .

The only thing stopping them being carbon neutral is the footprint of the daily air freights to Europe.

If the UK market decided to forgo imported flowers in a bid to better the environment, the farm would have to downsize and many workers and their dependants would be left without any resources – there are no other industries in the Naivasha area.

Imvulata works in the packing facility on the farm, where she sorts the quality of roses before they are shipped to the UK. She works a five-day week, 8am – 6pm and is paid approximately £20 a week.



She has a three-year-old daughter called Stacey and lives in her house on the estate with her three brothers – so there are five of them in the house.

Stacey goes to the creche and her siblings attend the schools.

Imvulata is the eldest child and so bears total financial responsibility for those she lives with.

We visited her, and she told us her story.



Here is Imvulata's story
If this factory wasn’t here, we would lose a lot of jobs.

Most of the people here are working and are here to earn their living.

This is where they depend on schooling, basic needs and everything they need in their homes.

This is where they get the money to support themselves.



Without this there would be a lot of poverty, because people would be jobless and people would commit crimes - there is no other way to get money.

You would be jobless regardless of if you are educated or from a well-educated background.

You won’t have any other alternative.

“In many parts of the world a lot of people are saying we shouldn’t buy flowers from Kenya because they have to be flown in and are worried about the climate – what would you say to them?”
People should be positive about our product. You have to import and export to sell the right products.



If you don’t buy our products, where will we sell them? This company will be shut down.

I’d like people to stop and think about the lives of those kids who are in school, and for the parents that are here. This (the factory) is where they get their capital so we are not supposed to be negative about our product, we are supposed to be positive.

I get my food from this company. My food, my clothing, all my basic needs I get from this company, what I can.

We have bonus schemes – you get paid as much as you work, that shows that if you work faster you earn a bonus and that is very encouraging for workers.

There is five of us – me, my three brothers and my daughter.

“If you didn’t have this provided where would you live?”
I don’t know, because of the current situation it has forced me to stay here. Maybe I will be somewhere else. But I am happy. Electricity and water is free.



This is where I do the cooking, and here are our two bedrooms. We have a sink outside and we have a bathroom outside too.

We appreciate everything the house we have been provided with.

If the factory wasn’t there, we would lose a lot. Most of our kids are here, we depend on that factory.

Everything is about that factory.

We would be living in the nearest slum.
