Star Wars: The Last Jedi now playing at home: Everything we know
The newest Star Wars film can now be in your home movie collection. It's stacked with special features, including The Director and the Jedi documentary.

Video screenshot by Gael Fashingbauer Cooper/CNET
Oh my Skywalker! Star Wars: The Last Jedi has made more than $1 billion in theaters worldwide, and it's now widely available for purchase or to stream on Netflix. But you didn't expect Disney to stop telling the story of The Last Jedi with just the movie, right? Since the first trailer's premiere at the Star Wars Celebration in April through adaptations of the story into a novelization and comic book, Lucasfilm has been enlarging the latest tale of a galaxy far, far away.

While we reviewed the movie when it came out, we'll still start this off with the 100 percent spoiler-free details for anyone who's been avoiding online trailers, toys, complaints over the story or anything else that's since hit the web during the theatrical run.

Star Wars: The Last Jedi hit theaters in the US, UK and Australia on Thursday, Dec. 14. The movie became available to stream on Netflix on Tuesday, June 26 as part of Disney's ongoing deal with Netflix that will end in 2019 when Disney launches its own streaming service. Rogue One: A Star Wars Story is currently available on Netflix too.

You can purchase a digital copy of the film, which has been available since March 13, via digital stores like iTunes, Google Play, Vudu or Amazon. You can also buy it through Disney's Movies Anywhere service, and link those stores to your Movies Anywhere account to view on whichever device you want. That way you can watch The Last Jedi from your iPhone, iPad, Android device, Roku, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Amazon Fire TV or any other device that supports at least one of those digital stores.

Physical copies of The Last Jedi came out on March 27, making the movie available on Blu-ray 4K Ultra HD, Blu-ray and DVD.

The home release is stacked with special features, including The Director and the Jedi documentary on director Rian Johnson's journey through the film's production, as well as deleted scenes and audio commentary.

Get your pause button ready if you need a bathroom break. The Last Jedi is the longest Star Wars film so far, with a runtime of 2 hours, 30 minutes.

Nearly everyone in 2015's Star Wars: The Force Awakens returns in one way or another. That includes legacy actors Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker and the late Carrie Fisher in her final portrayal of Leia Organa. (No, Harrison Ford's Han Solo isn't back.) 

Newer faces like Daisy Ridley as Rey, John Boyega as Finn, Adam Driver as Kylo Ren, Gwendoline Christie as Captain Phasma and Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron also continue their stories. 

CGI-wise, Andy Serkis returns to embody Supreme Leader Snoke, and Lupita Nyong'o is back as Maz Kanata. BB-8 rolls on back, and Chewbacca too.