How to get started composting
Composting is a way to reduce your food waste while creating rich fertilizer for your garden. What was once a fringe practice is now mainstream, with many trash collection facilities across the US and in the UK now composting food scraps.No matter if you live in a city or far out in the country, you can make composting part of your recycling routine. Here are some basics to get you started.What is composting?Composting is basically helping food trash and other organic items to decompose into a substance that can be used to alter the composition of soil so that it's more nutritious for plants. To start the composting process, certain bacteria activators are added to the organic material to create heat. The heat causes the organic material to decompose more quickly than it would out in nature.Outside composting. There are two main ways of composting: outside and inside. First, let's take a look at outside composting.Some gardeners prefer to have a compost pile in their yard. This is exactly what it sounds like. It is a pile layered with grass clippings, food bits, sticks and dead leaves.The pile is started in a sunny area with a layer of twigs and sticks on the ground to help with air flow. Then, moist organic material (like food scraps or grass clippings) is layered with dry material, such as leaves, twigs and sawdust. That dry material is crucial, because you don't want the compost to be too damp, which will cause foul odors and attract pests.This type of composting takes some work because the pile will need to be turned (basically mixed up) every week or two using a pitchfork or compost aerator. The benefit is that it's basically free. The only items you need to purchase are a turning tool and some compost activator.An easier outdoor solution is a compost tumbler, like the Yimby or the Miracle-Gro Large Dual Chamber Compost Tumbler. Both of these consist of rotating barrels that you throw your yard and food waste into and then spin five to six times every two to three days. The spinning mixes the compost to encourage quick and even decomposition.The same rules about wet and dry material apply; you need to keep the compost well balanced so that it breaks down correctly. When choosing an outdoor system, also be sure to look for a unit that has many aeration holes to release gases caused by the food decomposing. A closed container can explode if too much pressure from gasses builds up.