SEAT PLEASANT, Md. – Kevin Durant had just finished his freshman season at the University of Texas and was preparing to go early in the first round of the NBA draft when he stopped by his hometown and asked his godfather and longtime mentor, Taras Brown, to go get some shots up with him.

It was before he was very, very famous — the kind of transcendent fame that makes him recognizable across the world. Or at least before he realized that he was not just another kid playing basketball in the neighborhood. Durant, who had just won the National Player of the Year award after a standout season at Texas, told Brown he wanted to go to one of the bigger court complexes in the area – the Run ‘N shoot athletic center.

Brown wanted to go to the Seat Pleasant Activity Center, known as the Rec, where he had first met Durant when the Warriors’ star was 8 years old and where Durant had spent much of his childhood and teen years.

“I said, ‘Let’s work out at the Rec,” Brown remembered. “He said, ‘No, I can work out at Run ‘N Shoot, no problem.’ Now mind you, you’re Kevin Durant. You just won National Player of the Year, swept all of the awards. You’ve been on ESPN everyday.”

But, Durant insisted on the bigger complex. They arrived to see hundreds of kids playing across the courts in a tournament being held there.

“So mind you, we walking in there and he has a Texas hat and a Texas shirt on. So we’re walking in and everybody sees him. They go crazy,” Brown said. “One little kid was dribbling the ball up the court as the game was going on, the point guard, as the game is going on. He looking at Kevin. He saw Kevin, his eyes wide open.

“He’s still doing this” he adds, mimicking a dribbling motion, “but he doesn’t have the ball. He goes about 15 steps looking at Kevin, going up the court, and the other team is going the other way with the ball and the coach is yelling at him, ‘What are you doing?’ But he’s still looking at Kevin, thinking he’s dribbling the ball.”

Quickly, a mob swirled around Durant, who looked at Brown, overwhelmed.

“So I’m sitting back and I can see him look at me from afar, with his face like ‘Come and get me.’ And I look at him and said, ‘That’s why I said we should just go to the (rec center).’ ”

The rec center that Brown is referring to is pretty standard as far as rec centers go. There’s a weight room, a gym, a room with video games and TVs, a big activity space and staff offices where everything from summer camps to senior programs gets planned. Durant has donated money to refurbish the outdoor courts, purchase new backboards for the courts inside, and provide video games and flatscreen TVs. Warriors logos and Durant banners and photos now hang everywhere and an activity room inside the facility is named after him.



It’s the place where he comes to still be just a normal guy, the staff there says. On Friday night, a group of teens and staff gathered to watch Durant win his second title with the Warriors.

A replica of Durant’s MVP ring and rings sit on a table in front of a replica trophy.

One of those teens, 16-year-old Zion Kirkland, said he doesn’t know Durant personally but he does know how much he’s done for the rec center. “I know he was raised in the rec, like us,” he said. “It motivates me because I want to get to the level that he’s on today.”

When asked before the game how Durant was going to do, Kirkland said he was pretty sure he’d put up a triple double. (Durant finished with 20 points, 10 assists and 12 rebounds.) As for MVP?

“Kevin all the way,” he said confidently.

Why? “Because I’m from the rec and Kevin’s from the rec and so we have that connection that he’s going to be the MVP because I’m an MVP.”

A lot of the kids hanging out at the rec were invited to the Warriors game when they played the Wizards earlier this season in Washington. Some also participated in the private tour the Warriors took of the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture. And they’ve seen Durant hanging around, for years, just acting like another kid from the rec.



“Kevin was always a role model here and someone who I looked up to,” said Keith Shivers, 24, who played basketball at Coppin State.

His first memory of Durant, he said, is playing full-court one-on-one and Durant “never letting me win.”

“I gave him a little bit of competition but he would always push me to be better so he would never take it easy on me,” he said. “He showed me different things but he made sure he always won so he could hold it over my head.”

Durant met Brown through the PG Jaguars AAU team, and Brown would go on to become his mentor and godfather. “At 8, he was quiet, he was well-mannered,” Brown said. “He liked to stay to himself, he always liked to please everybody and he would always ask, ‘Do you need anything?’ He just loved this facility. When he first got here, he just saw a big old gym and saw us and said, ‘This is my outlet.’ ”

It still is. Durant sometimes returns to hang out at the front desk, posing for the occasional photo with a starstruck kid who hasn’t also hung around the center enough to be familiar with the sight of the hometown hero.

“He’ll just sit there and watch them come in and if it’s someone he knows he’ll say, ‘How’d you do in school this year? What are you doing what are you up to?’ Or a kid might come in that he knows and he’s met the kid three or four times and the kid might come in and he might not say something to Kevin because the kid thinks ‘I wonder if Kevin remembers me?’ So the kid comes in, scans his card, Kevin says ‘You’re not going to speak to me?’

“They see as a Kevin as a celebrity, but that’s not Kevin,” Brown added. “He loves to come down here. Whatever he do, he makes sure the rec is provided with money. Like, we’re open on Sundays because of Kevin Durant. He donated money so the community could have another day to keep the kids off the street.”

On Friday, Brown sat in the back activity room as the game blared on in the front of the center. He gets too nervous, he said, to watch the entire thing. He’ll get updates on the score from text messages and with a few minutes left, he’ll go watch Durant seal his second title. Tomorrow, he’ll return to keep working with whoever may be the next NBA superstar. Or at least just another kid who wants to play ball.

“I said, ‘Kevin I’m not going to train anymore after you, I’m not going to coach,’ ” he said. “He said he doesn’t want to be the last.

“So I keep on going.”