
Fresh Hong Kong protests planned for Friday
Calls for new demonstrations come as government fails to respond to a list of protester demands

Emma Graham-Harrison in Hong Kong


Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.21BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.43BST


Hong Kong is braced for another round of demonstrations after the government failed to respond to a list of protester demands including an investigation into police brutality and the withdrawal of an extradition bill by a Thursday afternoon deadline.
After cut-off set by protest leaders passed without word from the government, messages began circulating on social media calling people to come to central Hong Kong from 7am on Friday.
Hundreds of thousands of people have demonstrated in Hong Kong against legal changes that would make it easier to extradite people to China. Supporters say the amendments are key to ensuring the city does not become a criminal refuge, but critics worry Beijing will use the law to extradite political opponents and others toChina. Under the amended law, those accused of offences punishable by seven years or more in prison could be extradited.
The government claims the push to change the law, which would also apply to Taiwan and Macau, stems from the killing last year of a Hong Kong woman while she was in Taiwan with her boyfriend. Authorities in Taiwan suspect the womans boyfriend, who remains inHong Kong, but cannot try him because no extradition agreement is in place.
Officials have promised to safeguard against abuses, pledging that no one at risk of political or religious persecution will be sent to the mainland. Suspects who could face the death penalty would not be extradited.
Hong Kong officials have repeatedly said the bill has not come from the central government in Beijing. However, Beijing has voiced its backing for the changes.
Many Hong Kongers fear the proposed extradition law will be used by authorities to target political enemies. They worry the new legislation spells the end of the one country, two systems policy, eroding the civil rights enjoyed by Hong Kong residents since thehandover ofsovereigntyfrom the UK to China in 1997.
Many attending the protests said they could not trust China as it had often used non-political crimes to target government critics, and said they also feared Hong Kong officials would not be able to reject Beijings requests. Legal professionals have also expressed concern over the rights of those sent across the border to be tried. The conviction rate in Chinese courts is as high as 99%. Arbitrary detentions, torture and denial of legal representation of ones choosing are also common.
Lily Kuoin Beijing andVerna Yuin Hong Kong
No response  no retreat, read one. It called on people to picnic, sing, stroll, watch the turtles and keep [out of] the rain, phrases used as thinly veiled calls to political action because the planned demonstration does not have police approval.
The city has been electrified by a series of mass protests  two peaceful Sunday marches on successive weekends and one unauthorised midweek demonstration that turned violent.
People turned out in huge numbers because of concerns that the citys economy and society would be fatally damaged by the extradition law, which would allow authorities to send both visitors and residents for trial in Chinas opaque, sometimes brutal judicial system.
The large turnout forced the Hong Kong chief executive, Carrie Lam, to publicly apologise and suspend the law she had once promised to ram through the islands 