The latest on those who could leave Old Trafford this summer...
Paul Pogba - The Frenchman's team-mates believe he should leave United for the good of the club (Sun on Sunday, June 23) with the player expected to hold a pre-season meeting with Solskjaer when he will tell the United boss he wants to leave this summer (Star on Sunday, June 23). And Solksjaer wants the club to sell Pogba in order to boost his £100m transfer budget this summer (Star, June 22). Meanwhile, there are 48 days for Real Madrid to complete the signing of Pogba as Premier League clubs cannot sign players after Aug 8 and although United would be able to sell the World Cup winner after that point, they would be unlikely to do so if they could not replace him. Pogba wants to leave before United start their pre-season schedule on July 13 (AS, June 22).

However, Juventus have ended their interest in Jorginho, with the club set to offer Pogba a return to Italy (Daily Express, June 22) and the France international is desperate to return to Juve and has underlined his desire to move back to Turin by phoning new coach Maurizio Sarri (Tuttosport, June 21); Ole Gunnar Solskjaer, meanwhile, wants Pogba out of Old Trafford - as he is trying to raise transfer funds (Daily Mirror, June 21); The midfielder wants Juventus return rather than Real Madrid move from Man Utd, according to Sky in Italy (Sky in Italy, June 20); Real Madrid have made their opening offer for Pogba, of around £90m (The Sun, June 18); The Real Madrid target is prepared to go on strike to force through a switch to the 13-time European champions. (ABC, June 16); Pogba has suggested he is open to a potential transfer away from Manchester United. He told reporters in Tokyo: "For me I have been for three years in Manchester and have been doing great; some good moments and some bad moments, like everybody. Like everywhere else. After this season and everything that happened this season, with my season being my best season as well, I think for me it could be a good time to have a new challenge somewhere else."

Romelu Lukaku - Inter Milan are ready to offer United the chance to offload the striker in a straight swap for Mauro Icardi (Sunday Express, June 23). The Serie A club need to sell Icradi before they have any hope of financing a deal to sign Lukaku (Guardian, June 22).The Belgian has 'agreed a deal worth £180,000 a week to join Inter' (The Mirror, June 20).

David de Gea - United are back in talks with the Spaniard and are confident of getting him to sign a new five-year contract (the Sun, June 22). The goalkeeper's "prospects of a move to PSG are set to hinge on the French giants" move for Matthijs De Ligt' (The Daily Mail, June 20).

Juan Mata - The Spaniard has signed a new deal which will keep him at United until 2021, with the option of a further year's extension.

CONFIRMED: Ander Herrera and Antonio Valencia have been released by the club.

Scott McTominay - Manchester United are trying to tie down McTominay to a new contract to stop him joining Crystal Palace. (The Sun, June 16)

Fred - Roma's new manager Paulo Fonseca is weighing up a summer bid for United midfielder Fred, who move to Old Trafford for £53m less than 12 months ago. (Metro, June 15).

Andreas Pereira - The midfielder is in line for a new four-year deal at Manchester United (The Sun, June 8).

Premier League players released
Matteo Darmian - Valencia are reported to have held talks with United about buying the full-back (The Sun and Daily Mail, June 7).

Marcus Rashford - With 12 months to go on his contract, Rashford is no closer to signing a new deal than earlier in the summer (The Sun, June 13); The forward is holding out for a staggering £300,000 a week to sign a new deal at Manchester United. (Mirror, June 16); Manchester United may be forced to pay Rashford £350,000 a week to fend off Real Madrid and Barcelona. (The Sun, June 16)

Alexis Sanchez - United are set to be lumbered with the £500,000-a-week forward next season because nobody can afford to sign him (Sunday Express, June 23; The Times, June 22). However, Juventus and Inter Milan are believed to be interested.

Marcos Rojo - The Argentinian defender says he wants to stay at Old Trafford.