Terry Collins says Mickey Callaway needs to ‘respect’ the media
He spent seven seasons managing the Mets in the New York media crucible, even taking his club to the World Series in 2015, but Terry Collins was seasoned and experienced enough during his Flushing tenure to never let any frustrations get the best of him and his relationship with the Fourth Estate.
Collins would not say whether or not his successor Mickey Callaway should be fired as a result of Callaway’s public verbal takedown of a Newsday beat writer in Chicago Sunday, only that baseball players and team personnel have to always “respect” the media. But another baseball source said Callaway’s outburst sent shockwaves throughout front offices, and that the most common reaction by executives was that Callaway is not made to manage in New York.
Mickey Callaway won’t apologize for his temper tantrum »
“I wasn’t there so I don’t know anything about it. I just know — times are tough with the way things have been going (for the Mets). But you’ve got to respect everybody’s jobs. That’s the way I look at it,” Collins, 70, told the Daily News Monday at Winged Foot Golf Club in Mamaroneck, where he was one of dozens of sports and entertainment celebrities taking part in Hall of Fame-bound Mariano Rivera’s charity golf outing. The event benefits White Plains Hospital and Rivera’s foundation.
Collins is now a special assistant to Mets general manager Brodie Van Wagenen, and the former Mets manager wasn’t in Chicago Sunday when Callaway detonated. The heated exchange between the Mets skipper and reporter Tim Healey was followed by pitcher Jason Vargas threatening Healey with physical harm. Vargas reportedly had to be restrained.
Asked if the verbal outburst warrants Callaway being dismissed, Collins deferred to his boss.
“Again, that’s Brodie’s decision. I’m going to pretty much divert that stuff to him. I’m not around enough to know what’s going on,” said Collins, who was replaced by Callaway after the 2017 season. “I don’t know what happened, what provoked it. All I can tell you is what I did, and that is you gotta respect the position. You can say what you want about (the media), but you’ve got to respect the job. ”
Collins did point out that the Mets came into 2019 with high expectations, no doubt intensified by Van Wagenen’s boast during the winter that the rest of the National League East should “come get us.” The Mets take a sub-.500 record (37-41) into Philadelphia Monday night for the start of a four-game series against the struggling Phillies.
“I really thought when (the Mets) left spring training their pitching was going to really carry them. Obviously with Noah (Syndergaard) being (injured)... The bullpen situation has obviously been an issue, which I’m surprised with,” said Collins.
On Sunday, Callaway left reliever Seth Lugo in the game late against the Cubs, despite the right hander laboring. Callaway eschewed bringing in closer Edwin Diaz, and Lugo served up a three-run home run to the Javier Baez in the eighth. Callaway’s postgame media session was tense, according to reports, but it was afterward when the skipper cursed at Healey and asked that he be removed from the visitors’ clubhouse. Healey reportedly had only said, “See you (Monday), Mickey” after Callaway had dressed in street clothes and was leaving Wrigley Field. Vargas’ antics toward Healey then ensued.
“Jason’s been around a long time. Again, I wish I (knew) more. I don’t. I don’t know Jason very well. I just feel bad for him. That’s a tough situation the way things have gone. I just hope (Callaway and Vargas) can get through it,” said Collins.
Dan Duquette, the former Orioles and Red Sox GM, also is seasoned in dealing with the media scrutiny, especially in Boston before the Sox broke an 86-year-old curse in 2004, after Duquette was gone.
“As long as you’re in a pennant race, everything is terrific,” said Duquette. “But as soon as you’re not contending and things go downhill, all hell breaks loose. I don’t know if the Mets are teetering on the edge, yet, but it sure feels like there’s tension in the clubhouse. The expectations are much higher, especially in a major market. But the media has a job to do, to cover the ball club.
"They’re going to continue that," added Duquette. "And those were legitimate questions to ask when you lose a close game.”
It took Collins five seasons to get the Mets to the postseason, when they made their unlikely run to the Fall Classic before losing to the Royals. Collins said there were plenty of long days in between.
“A lot of days are tough. I’m sure (Callaway) is doing the best he can, with some of the guys hurt. You lose your good players and then when they come back, they’ve got to play good,” said Collins. “That’s the name of the game. I certainly watch as much as I can, and root them on and hope they get hot. I know they’ve got a long, long way to go yet. Anything can happen as we all know.”