A fight with Jon Jones could be Brock Lesnar’s first order of business if he returns to the UFC.

Of course, UFC President Dana White is confident that Lesnar (5-3 MMA, 4-3 UFC) will re-sign with the promotion when the ex-heavyweight champ’s WWE contract expires.

“I know he wants to fight, so I’m sure we’ll end up getting that figured out,” White told TMZSports.com.

Jones (23-1 MMA, 17-1 UFC) called out Lesnar after recapturing the light heavyweight title this past July with a knockout win over Daniel Cormier (20-1 MMA, 9-1 UFC) at UFC 214. In return, Lesnar told the new light-heavy champ, “Be careful what you wish for.”

Then, Jones’ life and career again went topsy-turvy when he failed a post-fight drug test, his second under the UFC’s anti-doping program.

Earlier this year, Jones was given a hefty fine and stripped of a fight license in California. But his case with USADA remains unresolved. He faces up to a four-year suspension for his second infraction.
White said there are lot of options for Lesnar when he returns to the octagon (check out the video above to watch his post-UFC 225 scrum). Where Jones fits in the picture is one of the things he’s working on.

“I’ll end up figuring that out in the next month,” White said. “That’s up to (the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency, the UFC’s drug testing administrator). USADA’s going to decide that.”

Lesnar’s current WWE deal reportedly allowed him to take one UFC fight, but he’s got his own hurdles to clear with USADA, which suspended him for one year after his brief return to the cage at UFC 200 resulted in a failed drug test.

If Lesnar re-signs with the UFC, he’ll need to submit to random drug testing for six months before being allowed to fight. He was infamously given an exemption from a four-month window prior to UFC 200.

Still, White feels pretty sure that if the stars align, Lesnar and Jones are both down to face off in the octagon.

“Yeah, they both want it,” he said. “It’s a fun fight.”

For more on the UFC’s upcoming schedule, check out the UFC Rumors section of the site.