Maryland millionaire sentenced to nine years in prison for fiery death of man he hired to dig secret nuclear bunker under his home
A Maryland millionaire was sentenced Monday to nine years behind bars in the fiery death of a 21-year-old man he hired to dig out tunnels to a secret underground nuclear bunker beneath his mansion.

A jury in April found Daniel Beckwitt guilty on charges of second degree murder and involuntary manslaughter in connection with the death of Askia Khafra, who first connected with the 28-year-old stock trader online in 2017.

On Sept. 10 of the same year, firefighters discovered Khafra’s charred and naked remains near a hole in the concrete floor of Beckwitt’s basement, which went down about 20 feet to three passageways extending out beneath the home. The victim had been carving the tunnels when an accidental electrical fire broke out that afternoon.

“If there was something I could do to bring Askia back — anything — I would jump at that chance,” said Beckwitt, who did not testify during his April trial.

“I most certainly did not intend for any of this to happen.”

[More News] At least two dead after workplace shooting at California Ford dealership: reports »
Beckwitt — who prosecutors described as a computer hacker, paranoid about a possible nuclear attack by North Korea — had faced 30 years in prison when he was sentenced by Montgomery Circuit Court Judge Margaret Schweitzer. He was handed 21 years in total, though Schweitzer suspended all but nine years.

The judge blamed Beckwitt’s “intellectual arrogance" for Khafra’s tragic passing.

“You though that everything would be fine because you were very smart,” Schweitzer told him. “You thought you could fix everything.”

[More News] 47 dogs confiscated from Trenton home »
Khafra would often spend days at a time beneath the house, eating and sleeping in the tunnel network, which had been equipped with lights, air circulation and a heater. Just hours before the deadly blaze, the worker texted Beckwitt warning him of a smoke smell in the underground system – but his employer didn’t answer until six hours later.

When he did finally respond, Beckwitt wrote there had been a “major electrical fire.” Instead of immediately showing up for help though, he said that he just “switched it all over to another circuit,” prosecutors said.

Beckwitt later admitted to being “specifically aware of the increased likelihood of a fire breaking out within hours before the call of a house fire,” according to court documents.

[More News] Mother accused of torturing her children, boiling their puppies and poisoning the family kitten »
Detectives responding to the incident said the Bethesda residence resembled that of a hoarder’s, with “immense piles of garbage” that resulted in “narrow maze-like paths.”

Khafra’s body was just steps away from the basement’s exit, which was blocked shut by discarded items and trash. The clutter “significantly prevented normal ease of movement within the home,” according to the documents.

Police said they also found a “haphazard daisy-chain of extension cords and plug extenders” set up to power the underground hideaway “that created a substantial risk of fire”

[More News] SEE IT: Man poops in stranger’s driveway, homeowner left baffled »
Robert Bosnib, one of Beckwitt’s attorneys, called the sentence “fair” but also pointed out that the fire was “purely accidental” and not a “criminal act” in an email to CNN.

“This is a passive omission. This a failure to clean up the house,” he said. “That’s what he was on trial for, the consequences of failing to keep the basement clean.”

The Maryland hacker battled back tears in the courtroom Monday as Khafra’s parents addressed him directly and discussed the impact of their son’s loss. They had filed a wrongful death lawsuit against Beckwitt on the anniversary of the Sept. 10, 2017 fire.

[More News] Louisiana man recently named Teacher of the Year found murdered »
“Askia’s death has left me broken,” Claudia Khafra said. “I am constantly plagued by feelings of emptiness.”

With News Wire Services