
Fifas dirty laundry does not cause such a stench in murky times of today
Contact author


Wed 19 Jun 2019 14.13BST


Last modified on Wed 19 Jun 2019 19.00BST


Im so glad that sporticidal Fifa president, Gianni Infantino, got to enjoy his second-term victory speech two weeks ago entirely free of spoilers. Nobody talks about crisis at Fifa any more or rebuilding it from scratch, he announced from the stage. Nobody talks about scandals or corruption  we talk about football. We can say that weve turned the situation around. This organisation has gone from being toxic, almost criminal, to being what it should be  an organisation that develops football and is now synonymous with transparency, integrity.
Mmm. Following the detention of the former Uefa boss Michel Platini on Tuesday, this now joins the ever-lengthening list of things Infantino is wrong about. Or does it? Platini is in some way the most disheartening of all the Fifa round-ups. We had so long come to expect certain behaviours of professional leeches such as Jack Warner, whose only true talent brought joy to no one but their bank managers. That the corruption machine could be even alleged to have devoured perhaps Frances greatest player is a much more tragic state of affairs. Platini has been released without charge and denies all accusations. As he put it: I feel totally foreign to any of these matters.
Even so, it must be said the story of Platinis detention and 15-hour questioning didnt make the crack it would have back in the day. The spring of 2015 feels rather longer ago than it might. Four years back, a Fifa conference in Zurich was enlivened by the arrest of many senior figures from world footballs governing body. Just after 6am, one late May morning, they were led from the Baur au Lac hotel under bedsheets in a raid on behalf of the US authorities. The coverage was wall-to-wall.
They were expected to uphold the rules that keep soccer honest. Instead they corrupted the business of worldwide soccer to serve their interests and enrich themselves, declaimed the US attorney general Loretta Lynch at a New York press conference. They did this over and over, year after year, tournament after tournament. Separately, Swiss federal prosecutors announced criminal proceedings in connection with the award of the 2018 World Cup to Russia and the 2022 tournament to Qatar.
Much of the information on which the US was basing its case had been obtained via its plea-bargaining informant Chuck Blazer, the Fifa ExCo member and Concacaf general secretary who rode between vast expense-account dinners on one of his fleet of mobility scooters, ran up a $29m Amex bill and owned a second apartment in his building which was solely for the use of his cats. The building, incidentally, was Trump Tower in New York, which was owned by the man described at the time as Apprentice star and real estate mogul Donald Trump.
Yes, rather a lot has changed in rather a lot of places since the Fifa spring of 2015, and in many ways this political turmoil  by no means limited to the US  has been to Fifas benefit.
Whatever Infantino might claim, it is hard to escape the sense that world footballs governing body has not got cleaner in any meaningful way. Its just that everything else has got significantly dirtier. Its hard not to be 