U.S. is M.I.A. in refugee crisis: As millions globally flee persecution, America ignores its historic leadership role
Today is World Refugee Day, an annual moment to recognize the world’s moral obligation to provide safety and shelter to people fleeing danger and persecution in their homelands.
There’s no better time to urge national leaders — Congress, the Trump administration and the candidates for president — to rebuild and restore America’s role as a haven for the oppressed.
According to the United Nations, an estimated 26 million refugees are fleeing persecution and seeking safety. By common agreement at the end of World War II America and most nations have agreed to take in refugees in an organized fashion. It was a “never again” response to the dark years when millions of innocents, trapped in Europe, perished at the hands of the Nazis.
In recent years, the United States accepted and resettled about 95,000 refugees a yea — a number that has been slashed to 22,000 by the Trump administration.
I recently talked about the crisis with David Miliband, the former Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom, who now runs the International Rescue Committee, a global humanitarian aid organization headquartered across the street from Grand Central Terminal on 42nd St. (I posted the conversation online on my podcast, “You Decide.”) 
Miliband wants to dispel myths about refugees and how to help them — starting with the misconception that America is somehow being overrun with refugees.
“Less than 2% of the world's refugees are in America. Six to 8% are in Europe,” he told me. “The vast bulk of the world's refugees are in poor and lower-middle income countries around the world near places that are violent. “
Miliband gives examples torn from the headlines. “If you think about the crisis in Myanmar — Burma — where 800,000 Rohingya Muslims were driven out a year and a half ago, where did they go? Not to the U.S. or Europe. They’re in Bangladesh, a lower-middle income country,” he says. “If you think about the Venezuela crisis at the moment, three million refugees from Venezuela driven out by the economic and political collapse are in Columbia, more than a million of them. It’s actually relatively poor, even fragile countries.” 
And 60% refugees are living in cities rather than refugee camps, says Miliband. And it can take a long time to get them settled.
“Less than 2% of the world's refugees went home last year. The average length of displacement seems like it's at least 17 years, the average. I think that's shocking,” he says. [After] 17 years, you've got kids, you've got a whole life that's been turned upside down forever really, and that's why we need to change the way humanitarian aid works. It's not just about survival. It's actually about employment. It's about education. It's about helping you thrive.”
In a few countries, like Uganda, assistance to refugees includes giving them farmland, credit and a chance to make a living so that they aren’t a burden on the host country. 
Almost lost in the anti-immigration rhetoric and policies of the Trump administration is the dramatic slashing of 75% of the refugees that the U.S. accepts and helps resettle.
It shouldn’t be a partisan issue. “It’s interesting, the president who admitted more refugees than any other was not the most liberal president America has ever had,” Miliband says. “Ronald Reagan admitted more refugee — more than 200,000 in the early 1980s — than any other American president.”
Reagan’s commitment to U.S. leadership on accepting refugees and other immigrants was a key part of the Cold War battle against the Soviet Union — a way of showing off the American values of openness, compassion and diversity. E pluribus unum. 
Democrats in Congress have introduced a bill, the Grace Act, that would require the administration to return to the past practice of accepting and resettling at least 95,000 refugees a year. Every one of the candidates for president should vow to press for passage — and begin rebuilding America’s reputation as as a beacon of hope.