Actress Mira Sorvino 'gagged with condom' during audition when she was 16
Actress Mira Sorvino has said she was tied to a chair and gagged with a condom during an audition when she was just 16.
After taking the condom out of her mouth, the casting director allegedly said: "Sorry for the prophylactic."
Speaking to the Hollywood Foreign Press Association podcast, Sorvino said the man also bruised her arm during the try-out for a horror movie.
The star, who was one of the first people to make allegations of sexual harassment against disgraced film producer Harvey Weinstein, said it was one of her "very first auditions" and she was "completely treated inappropriately".
Describing her teenage experience, she said: "In order to scare me for this horror movie scene, he tied me to a chair, he bruised my arm and - I was 16 years old - and then he gagged me, and I was all game because I'm trying to be scared for the scene.
"And at the end he takes the gag out of my mouth and he said, 'sorry for the prophylactic'. So he had gagged me with a condom.
"I was too young, thank God, to know what a condom tasted like. It was so inappropriate. And what the heck was a casting director doing with a condom in his pocket?"
She did not name the alleged culprit.
Speaking about Weinstein to the New Yorker in October, Sorvino said he had chased her around a room after he started massaging her shoulders in a Toronto hotel in 1995.
Once a series of allegations against Weinstein began to emerge, Lord Of The Rings director Sir Peter Jackson said Weinstein had described Sorvino as a "nightmare" to work with.
It led to her name being taken off Sir Peter's casting list.
Sorvino, who won the the best supporting actress Oscar for her performance in Woody Allen's 1995 film Mighty Aphrodite, said she "burst out crying" after reading Sir Peter's comments.
"There it is, confirmation that Harvey Weinstein derailed my career, something I suspected but was unsure," she said in December.
"Thank you Peter Jackson for being honest. I'm just heartsick."