
Xi Jinping and Kim Jong-un reboot alliance with talks and mausoleum visit
Hopes that first visit by Chinese leader in 14 years will heal rift over Pyongyangs nuclear programme

Justin McCurry and agencies


Thu 20 Jun 2019 11.56BST


First published on Thu 20 Jun 2019 04.15BST


Xi Jinping and Kim Jong-un have held talks at the start of the Chinese presidents trip to North Korea, rebooting a troubled alliance as the pair face their own challenges from Donald Trump.
Xis two-day visit is the first by a Chinese leader to North Korea in 14 years, after relations between the cold war-era allies deteriorated over Pyongyangs nuclear provocations and Beijings subsequent backing of UN sanctions.
Chinas Xinhua news agency said the leaders held their first round of talks soon after Xi landed in Pyongyang with his wife, Peng Liyuan, the foreign minister, Wang Yi, and other officials.
Xinhua did not provide details, but North Koreas nuclear programme is expected to top the agenda, months after Kims second denuclearisation summit with Trump ended in failure.
Reports said 10,000 people waving flowers and chanting slogans greeted Xi at Pyongyangs airport, where he was met by Kim and his wife, Ri Sol-ju. Chinese media footage showed hundreds of people lining the streets as Xi was driven to the city centre.
In an unprecedented move for a visiting leader, Xi was shown around the Kumsusan Palace mausoleum, where the preserved bodies of North Koreas founder, Kim Il-sung, and his successor, Kim Jong-il  the grandfather and father respectively of the current leader  lie in state.
The Rodong Sinmun, the newspaper of North Koreas ruling party, devoted the top half of its front page to the summit, including a colour photograph and a profile of the Chinese leader.
It said the visit came at a time of complex international relations and proved that Beijing attached high importance to its ties with North Korea. Our people are proud of having a trustworthy and close friend like the Chinese people, it said.
Xi is expected to pay homage at Pyongyangs Friendship Tower, a monument to the Chinese troops who saved North Korea from defeat during the Korean war.
Analysts expect Xi to use his state visit, arranged to coincide with the 70th anniversary of China-North Korea ties, to demonstrate Beijings influence in the region amid uncertainty over the future of Trumps efforts to strike a deal with Kim on nuclear weapons.
For North Korea, the coming meeting will serve to show the US that China has its back and to send a message to Washington it should stop its maximum-pressure posture, said Lim Eul-chul, a professor of North Korean studies at Kyungnam University.
The summit is also designed to strengthen ties between the two neighbours after years of friction over Pyongyangs missile and nuclear programmes. Xi and Kim were expected to discuss economic ties and aid. There were reports that China may send hundreds of thousands of tons of rice to drought-stricken North Korea after the visit.
In a rare commentary in the Rodong Sinmun published before his visit, Xi suggested China could play a role in bridging the gap between North Korea and the US over denuclearisation.
Talks between Kim and Trump in Hanoi in February ended without an agreement after the sides differed on how far North Korea should go in dismantling its nuclear programme in return for sanctions relief.
Hailing the irreplaceable friendship between North Korea and China, Xi outlined a grand plan 