Danny Green’s Finals heroics paid off for the Raptors
The greatest shooter in basketball history played arguably the greatest game of his life on the biggest stage in the sport, and it wasn't nearly enough. The Warriors' 123-109 defeat to the Toronto Raptors was a role-reversal for the defending champions, as their singular star strained against a finely tuned team. After the game, Steph Curry paid the ultimate compliment to the man who played him in Game 3, revitalized marksman Danny Green.

“Every time we made a run or got the crowd into it, they made a tough three.”

Making a tough three to stop a run is Curry’s trademark. Glancing at his stat line (playoff career-high 47 points, including six threes) would make you think he did it again. But on Wednesday night, Green infringed on Curry's material.

The Raptors lit up Oracle Arena with 17 3-pointers. Green led the charge with six. After weeks of fluctuating between absent and essential, Green’s stroke vaulted the Raptors up two games to one against a badly depleted, Kevin Durant-less and Klay Thompson-less Warriors team.

Green, who scored all 18 of his points on threes, has the pedigree to be a Finals hero. He hadn't been playing like one until recently, though. The swingman hit four total 3-pointers in the Conference Finals against the Milwaukee Bucks. He was a “three and D” specialist firing away without any bullets in the chamber, playing more like a salary-matching throw-in in Toronto’s Kawhi Leonard’s instead of the vital cog in a perennial playoff contender.

Danny Green #14 lit up Oracle Arena during Game 3.
Danny Green #14 lit up Oracle Arena during Game 3. (Lachlan Cunningham/Getty)
The misfiring jumper hurt the Raptors in more ways than one. A shooter on a cold streak is bad enough, but once Green's minutes shrank due to the slump, the team lost his consistent wing defense as well. The starter in name only played just 14 minutes in Game 6 of the Conference Finals, yet still had a -7 plus/minus during his brief run on the court. He missed all of his long-range attempts over the final three games of the series.

With Green on the court, the Raptors offense looked clogged. Without him, Leonard and the rest of the team defense was stretched to its max. The steady and dependable former champion had become the team’s biggest liability. As Toronto coach Nick Nurse said of Green’s behind-the-arc domination, the team was used to “relying on those” long-range bombs.

The Raptors missed Green, but ultimately didn’t need him against a Bucks team with only one undisputed offensive star (though what a star he is). Benching their second-best wing defender against Curry and Thompson, however, was completely untenable. Toronto needed Green to return to the form of not just the regular season, where he shot 45.5 percent from 3, but to the form that nearly swung the 2013 Finals for the Spurs, and contributed to the 2014 title.

Green has done exactly that, shooting over 51 percent across the three Finals games. He’s a true running-mate for Leonard and Kyle Lowry. During one first-quarter Raptors fast break in Game 3, the Warriors transition defense sealed off the paint and midrange area — all attention understandably on Leonard, who was leading the break. Andre Iguodala, closing in from half court, pressured Leonard from behind, three defenders now focused on the former Finals MVP. Leonard can shoot over and through coverage, but there’s no need when you’ve got a shooter like Green shooting the way he has been. Green was open in the left corner, ignored by all three Warriors in the play.

One second later, as Green’s shot was arcing down, Iggy threw his hands up in what looked to be disgust, seemingly aware he knew exactly what he had done and what was likely to happen.

A couple of hours and more than a few more 3-pointers later, the Raptors regained control of the series. Green was as big a reason for that as anyone. If he keeps it up, the Raptors could end up having traded for two Finals MVPs last offseason.