Fortnite's Season 5 Challenge Guide: Lightning Bolts, Risky Reels Treasure Map, And More
Here are all of the Season 5 challenges available so far.
by Kevin Knezevic on Jul 14, 2018 05:07 AM
Season 5 of Fortnite: Battle Royale has kicked off on PS4, Xbox One, PC, Nintendo Switch, and iOS. As before, the new season brings with it an assortment of new challenges to complete, as well as a variety of Battle Pass rewards to unlock. This time, however, Epic has made a few notable changes to the way certain Battle Pass challenges operate. Here's everything you need to know about the new Season 5 challenges and details on all of the ones available so far.
Once again, players who purchase the Season 5 Battle Pass will get a set of objectives to complete every week, which in turn will go toward leveling the Battle Pass up and unlocking new rewards. Unlike past seasons, however, weekly challenges are now divided into two categories, Free (which are available to all Fortnite players) and Battle Pass (which are reserved for those who've purchased the Pass). That means that even if you haven't bought the Battle Pass, you'll still be able to complete certain objectives and earn rewards.
If you do decide to pick up the Battle Pass partway through the season, you'll be also able to retroactively unlock any premium rewards you've earned based on the tier that you've already reached. However, one of the advantages of purchasing the Battle Pass early is bonus XP, which is awarded for playing in general and for playing in a party with friends. Since leveling up with XP translates into Battle Stars, you'll want to grab the Battle Pass as soon as you can and take advantage of these bonuses.
Gallery image 18
Drift challenges, on the other hand, task you with gaining a certain amount of XP. There are five Drift challenges to complete in total in Season 5, each of which reward you with a new style option for the Drift skin. If you manage to complete four out of the five Drift challenges, you'll also unlock the Rift Edge, an alternative for the pickaxe.
You'll find a complete list of all Season 5 challenges available so far below, along with links to our maps and guides that will help you complete them all. You can see all of the new skins, cosmetics, emotes, sprays, and other items to unlock this season in our gallery of Fortnite Season 5 Battle Pass rewards.
Fortnite: Battle Royale Season 5 Challenges
Road Trip
Complete all challenges from any week -- loading screen
Complete all challenges from any 2 different weeks -- loading screen
Complete all challenges from any 3 different weeks -- loading screen
Complete all challenges from any 4 different weeks -- loading screen
Complete all challenges from any 5 different weeks -- loading screen
Complete all challenges from any 6 different weeks -- loading screen
Complete all challenges from any 7 different weeks -- loading screen
Reward: Mystery Legendary item (likely a skin)
Drift
Gain 10,000 XP -- Drift Stage 1 style
Gain 25,000 XP -- Drift Stage 2 style
Gain 50,000 XP -- Drift Stage 3 style
Gain 100,000 XP -- Drift Stage 4 style
Gain 200,000 XP -- Drift Stage 4 style
Reward: Rift Edge (Epic harvesting tool)
Week 1
Free
Deal damage with SMGs to opponents (500) -- 5 Battle Stars
Search a Supply Llama (1) -- 5 Battle Stars
Clinger, Stink Bomb, or Grenade Eliminations (3) -- 10 Battle Stars
Battle Pass
Search chests in Snobby Shores (7) -- 5 Battle Stars
Search floating Lightning Bolts (7) -- 5 Battle Stars
Follow the treasure map found in Risky Reels (1) -- 10 Battle Stars
Eliminate opponents in Retail Row (3) -- 10 Battle Stars
Reward: 5K XP (after completing four challenges, only for Battle Pass owners)