The Technology 202: Andrew Yang's tie-less debate performance makes a statement
Note to readers: Cat Zakrzewski is on vacation but will back at the helm of this newsletter on Monday, July  8. Not to worry, however, we have a parade of awesome guest writers to entertain you in the interim. Thanks for reading.
So, about last night. Andrew Yang, who says he's running "the nerdiest campaign in presidential history," made an almost immediate splash when he arrived without a tie on the second night of the first presidential Democratic debate. That may be the norm in Silicon Valley, but is considered pretty bold when it comes to political style (he did sport an American flag pin on his suit jacket, though.)
The former head of Venture for America, a nonprofit that sends entrepreneurs into cities to help revitalize them, Yang brought his passion to the stage on how to deal with economic disruption and a universal basic income for all Americans.
And like Wenesday night, Amazon got name-checked on the debate stage in terms of how to pay for his UBI, which would give $1,000 monthly to all Americans.
“Oh, so it's difficult to do if you have companies like Amazon, trillion-dollar tech companies, paying literally zero in taxes while they're closing 30 percent of our stores," he argued. (The Washington Post is owned by Jeff Bezos, who is chief executive of Amazon.)
Yang also believes the United States needs some form of value-added tax, which he says will will generate $800 billion in revenue and spark economic growth along with his UBI.
"We'd save money on things like incarceration, homelessness services, emergency room health care, and just the value gains from having a stronger, healthier, mentally healthier population would increase GDP by $700 billion," he said.
Yang is especially concerned with the automation of the workforce, which he says helped elect Donald Trump in key swing states. He thinks his proposals for UBI and a value-added tax will help those at the bottom end of the income spectrum readjust to the changing economy.
"We automated away 4 million manufacturing jobs in Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, and we are about to do the same thing to millions of retail jobs, call center jobs, fast food jobs, truck-driving jobs and other jobs through the economy," Yang said.
It's an interesting position for the only real tech alumnus on the Democratic debate stage. Yang isn't stressing the biggest issues between Silicon Valley and Washington: whether to break up big companies like Facebook and Google, and how to regulate fake and other malicious content sewn by bad actors on social media platforms. In fact, he told the New York Times he isn't necessarily in favor of breaking them up.
“The temptation though is to say break them up, which is frankly a 20th century solution to a 21st century problem," Yang said. "Competition isn’t always the answer."
Right now, Yang isn't much more than a blip in then polls, but he made the debate stage and draws thousands to his rallies, supported by the Yang Gang online. We'll be tracking his progress, but meanwhile read this really great profile from The Washington Post magazine's Maureen O'Connor.