Franz Edmund Creffield and the cult of personality
On May 7, 1906, in Seattle’s business district, George Mitchell, 23, shot a man point blank in the back of the head.
Then he lit a cigar and stood next to the body.
“I just shot the man for ruining my two sisters,” he calmly told police. “That’s all there is to it.”
The victim was Franz Edmund Creffield, thought to be in his early 30s but no one knew his exact date of birth. In fact, no one knew much about Creffield when he appeared in Corvallis, Oregon, in 1903, declared himself Joshua the Second, and started his Brides of Christ Church.
Creffield seemed an unlikely savior. Slightly built, about 5 foot 6, with light hair and pale blue eyes, there was nothing physically commanding about him. Still, he somehow managed to captivate people with a personality described as hypnotic.
In 1899, Creffield was with the Salvation Army in Portland, but soon resigned, saying the organization’s people were not “entirely of God,” wrote Theresa McCracken and Robert B. Blodgett in their book, “Holy Rollers: Murder and Madness in Oregon’s Love Cult.”
He headed to Corvallis, where he decided to establish a new religion.
“God revealed himself to me,” he proclaimed. “He spoke to me. I heard His voice.”
And people believed him.
Among his disciples were Orlando V. Hurt, a Corvallis merchant, his wife, Sarah, daughters Maud and Mae, and son Frank. They were among several followers from stable, well-to-do families.
Others, like the Mitchell sisters, Donna, 23, and Esther, 15, had troubled lives. Their mother died when the girls were very young, and their father left his seven children to the care of others. Donna was happily married when Creffield came to town, and Esther was a shy girl who played piano for the Salvation Army.
Accounts vary of what happened at his prayer meetings. A Daily News feature in 1944 described the “lusty cult leader” thundering “Vile clothes, be gone!” Then he stripped naked and his flock followed, fell to the ground, and started rolling. Historians have ruled out the mass nudity, attributing it to a writer’s imagination.
But there was no question the meetings were raucous, with loud moaning, rolling, and shrieking, going on for up to 24 hours. The noise was driving everyone crazy so Corvallis officials ordered the Holy Rollers out of town.
They moved to an island and carried on in tents.
Creffield eventually cast out most of the men. Then he ordered his younger followers to break up with their sweethearts and accept the “grace of love” only from him. He married Maud Hurt and had sex with others. He chose Esther Mitchell to bear his child, who he said would be the new Christ.
Maud remained devoted to him even after he built a huge bonfire with the furniture, clothing, and other worldly belongings — including a cat and a dog — that had been in her family’s home. Other minions used bonfires to purge their homes and souls of the corrupting influence of personal possessions.
In January 1904, the men of Corvallis finally got fed up, tarred and feathered the holy man, and ran him out of town.
But he returned. This time, police arrested him for adultery, for having relations with Esther’s married sister.
Somehow, he slipped away from his captors and vanished.
No one had any idea where he was until a few months later. A boy was playing under the Hurt’s home when he noticed something moving in the shadows. It was Creffield, filthy, starving, and with a wild beard. He had been living under the house for months. He was arrested, convicted of adultery, and sent to jail.
A few months after his early release in 1905, he headed to a new colony set up by his flock in a deserted spot on the coast, about 50 miles west of Corvallis.
He was on a shopping trip in Seattle with Maud when Esther Mitchell’s older brother, George, shot him dead. God told him to do it, George said.
He went on trial for a murder committed in broad daylight in front of witnesses. He freely confessed to the killing.
Yet it took less than 90 minutes for the jury to come to a verdict of not guilty. Mitchell’s plea was temporary insanity, brought on by Creffield’s corruption of his sisters. The decision was greeted with cheers in the courtroom, and George was hailed as a hero when he was released.
George planned to travel home to Portland the next day. Two of his brothers and sister Esther accompanied him to the train station. As he was saying goodbye, Esther pulled out a gun she had concealed under her coat, put it against her brother’s head, and fired. He died instantly.
Esther and Maud admitted conspiring to the revenge killing. Their trials had not started when, in November 1906, Maud died in jail. An autopsy found strychnine in her system.
Esther was sent to an asylum. Three years later she was freed and moved back with her parents into a house in Waldport, Oregon.
She married 1914, but just weeks after the wedding she took a fatal dose of strychnine.
That might have seemed to be the end of the madness, but as Blodgett and McCracken pointed out, there was an eerie postscript. In 1975, Waldport became the launch pad for another loopy cult that led to 38 suicides. It was called Heaven’s Gate.