E3, the biggest gaming event of the year, has come and gone. New titles washed up on the shores of the internet by the dozens last week, and it can be tough to keep track of them all. If you're new to Gamepedia, let us remind you that tracking is our job. And were good at our jobs.
Wikis are also our job, and we have an influx of fresh information-stations ready to be populated with data, stats, and secrets for a ton of the newly announced games to come out of E3. Come check them out!
A Plague Tale: Innocence
Imagine the deadly plague rats from Dishonored, who would rip bodies to pieces, but an entire game designed around the puzzley elements of manipulating the horde. Then you'd have a small idea of what A Plague Tale: Innocence hopes to achieve when this game launches next year. Up to 5,000 individual rats can be on screen at once, and you'll need to direct their infested fervor towards your enemies or away from points of interest as you search for a cure to the Black Death.
Babylon's Fall
PlatinumGames, purveyors of the excellent Bayonetta and Nier: Automata, are cooking up something bizarre in the form of Babylon's Fall. We know very little about it, save that it's coming out next year, and will feature some very sharp dressed knight duels. Considering Platinum's pedigree, we can also assume its an action game. Keep an eye on the wiki for more information as it becomes available. 
Command and Conquer Rivals
EA revealed the next step for the Command and Conquer franchise: hitting mobile devices as a PvP, free-to-play game. Command and Conquer Rivals will look to Clash Royale and the like for its competitive inspiration, featuring tier systems to determine rewards and equippable units, etc. It's still in alpha testing, but is expected to release this year.
Control
Remedy is back! The developers of the first two Max Payne games and Quantum Break have returned to bring us something truly weird. As Jesse, an agent for the secret US agency The Bureau of Control, you must find and eliminate the Hiss, an infection that is twisted the minds of your fellow agents and is tearing the agency apart from the inside. Use Force-like powers to shield yourself from harm, throw objects at enemies, and manipulate the world around you. Even your sidearm, a shape shifting pistol, can push the boundaries of reality in bizarre ways.
Daemon X Machina
Kenichiro Tsukuda, of Armored Core fame, is bringing high metal havok to the Switch with Daemon x Machina. Scavenging pieces from the world or off of enemies, you can make weapons to blow your enemies to bits and devastate the battlefield in giant mech. The color palette is intense and unique, and the music is inspired by his love for rock and roll. This title immediately stood out next to its Nintendo peers and is set to launch next year.
Deracine
Accompanying their other big debut, FromSoftware revealed another Sony-exclusive to look out for next year. Deracine is a VR adventure game that places you in the ethereal coil of a spirit summoned by a boarding school student. For what purpose? That's not clear, but you'll likely have to play it yourself to find out.
Fringe Wars
Thinking Stars and Oasis Games brings up the team-based multiplayer space shooter, Fringe Wars. Players take control of massive starships and customize them to meet the needs of deep space tactical warfare. Blending deep space ship combat from games like Dreadnought with traditional MOBA sensibilities, Fringe Wars looks to be a unique entry into the multi-player arena when it launches this year.
Gears Pop
Gears Pop might be one of the biggest surprises of the whole event. A mobile entry in the Gears of War franchise, it takes on the POP figure aesthetic in the same way LEGO games do their titular bricks. There isn't much in the way of actual gameplay details yet, but its expected to launch next year. 
Generation Zero
Avalanche Studios envisions an alternate history of their Swedish homeland in the 1980s, one devastated by hostile machines run amok. Either by yourself or in seamless co-op, use guerilla warfare to fight back against the metal menace and free your countryside of their iron grip.
Ghosts of Tsushima
The developers that brought us Sly Cooper and Infamous are changing their tune for their next big first party outing. Sucker Punch looks to channel their inner Akira Kurosawa for Ghosts of Tsushima, a third-person action game set around the Mongol invasion of Japan in the 1274. Samurai dueling is the main attraction here, as well as beautiful graphics and heavy cinema inspiration.
Little Dragons Cafe
When twins inherent the responsibility of running the family restaurant, learning the ropes of keeping the place open while feeding the hungry patrons seemed daunting enough. Try doing all that while taking care of a little dragon and having to adventure through dangerous places to scrounge up your necessities all by yourself. In Little Dragons Cafe, you'll do just that. Creator Yasuhiro Wada, of Harvest Moon fame, says you've never played a game like this before, and we'll to see how turn that statement is when this launches later this year.
Maneater
Blindside Interactive, developers of Killing Floor, are back with a new and and goofy survival game set deep in the Gulf Sea. As an angry shark, you must navigate the dangerous defenses that humans who really don't want a shark ruining their tourist attractions will set up to stop you. Fans of Jaws Unleashed will find a lot to love here.
Metal Wolf Chaos XD
Devolver Digital has been working in the shadows to revive this old FromSoftware Xbox exclusive, and it's finally come into the light. As the President of the United States, you must don your mech suit and defend the country from the rebellion against freedom lead by your former Vice President. This crazy shooter features over a hundred weapons and LOTS of things to shoot with them. When it's finally released this year, it will be the first time it would be made available for purchase outside of Japan.
Rapture Rejects
The Cyanide and Happiness webcomic enters the video game space for the first time in their goofy and brutal interpretation of the battle royale. The Rapture comes and doesn't take you, so you're left to scavenge the land for weapons and the opportunity to kill the other unworthy in hopes of impressing your way into heaven. Something tells me that's not how it's supposed to work.
SCUM
Devolver Digital and Gamepires want to shake up the survival game and battle royale genres at the same time. SCUM, a game where you play an escaped criminal lost on a strange island, is swinging for the fences in terms of feature density and unique gameplay experiences. Character customization can be done to the most minute of details, and can have surprising mechanical consequences. Being big and muscly means you're strong, but to maintain that physique, you need to sustain a diet high in protein and calories. Everything you can scrounge up and hunt to eat has real world accurate macro-nutritional data, so planning your intake is just as important as eating period. All this before the crazy third person shooter tweaks and big multi-player/singleplayer integration that hope to make SCUM stand out.
Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice
FromSoftware, developers of the revolutionary action RPGs Dark Souls and Bloodborne, are at it again with their latest game, Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice. Once rumored to be a direct sequel to Bloodborne, Sekiro is actually an entirely new franchise that takes cues from their old work, but expounds upon it. Use your wits, will, and gadgets to take revenge on the villain the dismembered you and left you for dead.
Star Control: Origins
Star Control: Origins is yet another example of reaching deep into gaming history to revive old franchises. Continuing the legacy of the Star Control games from the '90s, Origins places you at the helm of Earth's only intergalactic space ship. Travel into deep space in order to find new aliens and technologies in hopes to save humanity from itself. This re-imagining of the old adventure game staple will release September 2018.
Starfield
Bethesda looks to add another big role playing franchise to its portfolio with Starfield. Some speculate it to be "Skyrim in space" but speculation is all we really have. Todd Howard, director and executive producer of Skyrim and Fallout 4, isn't shying away from the comparisons, but makes a point to mention that Starfield will also be full of things you wouldn't expect to see from the developer.
Star Wars: Jedi Fallen Order
EA and Respawn announced the next new game based on the Star Wars license, called Jedi Fallen Order. Though not much is known about it now, Respawn CEO Vince Zampella revealed that you will play as a Jedi during the time between the Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope movies — a time where the Jedi were being actively hunted by the Galactic Empire. Check back for more details in the months ahead.
Stormland
Insomniac Games, of Ratchet and Clank fame, are cooking up a VR adventure game of the android post-apocalypse variety. The Tempest broke your robot body, but your fast paced adventure will find you picking up exotic materials to re-purpose into weapons to fight the powers that be. You don't have to go alone, you can fight alongside a community of androids in order to push back against The Tempest's forces.
The Awesome Adventures of Captain Spirit
The creators of Life Is Strange dropped a treat on Square Enix's E3 stage: a free game in the LiS universe about a young kid who pretends to fight evil doers as the superhero Captain Spirit. Sounds like a fun romp, until you remember that Dontnod's main world is full of strife and complex emotional (and physical) danger, and that Captain Spirit will likely be no exception.
The Elder Scrolls VI
The crown jewel of Bethesda Game Studios is The Elder Scrolls series, and since Skyrim's launch in 2011, the standardized refrain around the IP was "when are we getting the next one?" Years of speculation, and the launch of an Elder Scrolls MMO with several expansions, started to produce anxiety that we'd never return to the series. At the very end of Bethesda's E3 press conference, we were reassured that the game is absolutely happening. We know nothing else about it, but the fact that it is in fact happening is good news, at the least.
The Elder Scrolls Blades
Another big franchise coming to small screens, The Elder Scrolls Blades wants to capture that dungeon-diving adventure that makes the main series so popular and recreate it for on-the-go adventuring. A simple system of taps and swipes lets you do combat from the first-person perspective, and these functions easily translate no matter how you hold your phone. For Elder Scrolls nuts, this is a must-watch. 
The Quiet Man
Square Enix's The Quiet Man is not related to the John Wayne movie of the same name. At least we don't think so. There isn't a lot to go off of what they showed us during E3. It features a deaf protagonist who knows his way around a back alley brawl. It also features Quantum Break-esque film/gameplay crossover. There's still plenty to learn about this mysterious game between now and its presumed 2019 release date.
Transference
One of the rare VR titles featured prominently during the conferences, Transference promises to be a very surreal experience. You are jacked into an experiment designed by a troubled scientist, but the simulation is corrupt, and you'll have to endure very weird and haunting things to fix it. Ubisoft wants to sell the close relationship between playing a game and watching a movie, and how those lines will be blurred during the course of the experience. Dust your Oculus off, is what I'm saying.
Trover Saves the Universe
Looking at Trover Saves the Universe, this VR sci-fi platformer about saving dogs across the galaxy, it won't surprise you at all that its the brain child of Rick and Morty co-creator Justin Roiland. Sticking to the same absurdist humor and even a similar art style as the popular cartoon, Trover Saves the Universe is a joke-heavy action platformer that hopes to help make games funny again when it released in 2019.
Tunic
Tunic, the top down action rpg from Andrew Shouldice and Finji, got a big reveal on Microsoft's stage this E3. Don't let its cuteness fool you, it's Link to the Past inspirations shine through in its combat, puzzles, and exploration, meaning it's ready to challenge you.
Vigor
The makers of ARMA and DayZ are back with their next take on the survival shooter with Vigor. Set in the 1990s, Norway is the center of a huge nuclear attack, and those left alive must scrounge for scraps and fight for survival. With crafting and base building in the plans, the Xbox One will be home to this hardcore third-person survival come next year.