Intel CEO Brian Krzanich Resigns Over Consensual Relationship With Employee and Burger King Apologizes for an Ad Offering Burgers to Russian Women Who Get Pregnant by World Cup Players

By ASSOCIATED PRESS 
Updated: June 21, 2018 10:21 AM ET
NEW YORK — Intel CEO Brian Krzanich has resigned after the company learned of what it called a consensual relationship with an employee.
Intel said Thursday that the relationship was in violation of the company’s non-fraternization policy, which applies to all managers.
Chief Financial Officer Robert Swan will take over as interim CEO immediately. A search for a new CEO is underway.
In this #MeToo era, corporate America is under intense pressure to enforce workplace policies on gender equality and sexual harassment.
Earlier this month, Guess Inc. co-founder Paul Marciano stepped down following a company investigation into allegations of sexual harassment and assault.
John Lasseter, co-founder of Pixar Animation Studios and Walt Disney’s animation chief, also recently said he was resigning over what he called “missteps” with employees.
Krzanich joined Intel Corp. in 1982 as an engineer.
The abrupt departure of Krzanich, who has been the Intel’s top executive since 2013, overshadowed otherwise positive news for the $246 billion tech company.
Intel said Thursday that it expects to post a per-share profit of 99 cents in the second quarter, 13 cents better than Wall Street was expecting, and revenue of $16.9 billion, which is also better than had been projected by industry analysts.
Shares of Intel Corp., based in Santa Clara, California, slid 2 percent in early trading.
Burger King Apologizes for an Ad Offering Burgers to Russian Women Who Get Pregnant by World Cup Players



This Feb. 1, 2018, file photo shows a Burger King Whopper meal combo at a restaurant in the United States.
 
Gene J. Puskar—AP Photo
By ASSOCIATED PRESS 
June 21, 2018
(MOSCOW) — Burger King has apologized for offering a lifetime supply of Whoppers to Russian women who get pregnant by World Cup players.
Critics assailed the offer, announced on Russian social media, as sexist and demeaning.
The now deleted promotion pic.twitter.com/mg7xETHfQW
— Jenna Fryer (@JennaFryer) June 20, 2018
The announcement was removed Tuesday from Burger King’s social media accounts but was still circulating among Russian social network users. It promised a reward of free burgers to women who get “the best football genes” and “ensure the success of the Russian team for generations to come.”
In a statement Wednesday to The Associated Press, Burger King said, “We are sorry about the clearly offensive promotion that the team in Russia launched online.” It said the offer “does not reflect our brand or our values and we are taking steps to ensure this type of activity does not happen again.”
Ads in Russia often play on sexist stereotypes, notably ads around sporting events like the World Cup. Women’s rights activists have been increasingly speaking out against them.

