Nearly 300 children removed from migrant shelter with ‘appalling’ conditions
All but about 30 migrant children have been removed from a detention facility in Texas where they’d been subject to flu outbreaks, inadequate sanitation and food, harsh punishment and zero caretaking - conditions described as “appalling” by lawyers and a doctor who visited.
“Almost every child I spoke with had not showered or bathed since they crossed the border — some of them more than three weeks ago,” Elora Mukherjee, the director of the Immigrants’ Rights Clinic at Columbia Law School, told NBC News Monday. “There is a stench that emanates from some of the children because they haven’t had an opportunity to put on clean clothes and to take a shower.”
Department of Homeland Security officials told NBC News that the kids were now in a tent detention camp elsewhere in El Paso and will be placed soon with the Department of Health and Human Services. They are part of a surge of vulnerable migrants, mainly women and children, crossing into the U.S. from Mexico.
“In the last 40 days, 60,000 children have been entered into U.S. custody, both unaccompanied and as part of family units,” said Kevin McAleenan, Acting Secretary of Homeland Security, to Congress on June 11 as recorded by BBC News.
He also cited sagging morale and health of the border guards themselves, calling the situation at the border a humanitarian crisis, CBS News reported.
“Our short-term holding facilities were not designed to hold vulnerable populations and we urgently need additional humanitarian funding to manage this crisis,” Border Patrol officials told the Associated Press on Monday.
Mukherjee and other attorneys visited the facility designed for 100 but holding 350 last week, the Associated Press first reported Thursday. It was a Border Patrol station crammed with children, many of them caring for other children.
While most have families waiting to take them in, they have yet to be reunited and sorted out. 
The children ranged from teens to toddlers and infants, AP said.
“A Border Patrol agent came in our room with a 2-year-old boy and asked us, ‘Who wants to take care of this little boy?’ ” one girl told the visiting attorneys, according to AP. “Another girl said she would take care of him, but she lost interest after a few hours and so I started taking care of him yesterday.”
Seventy-two hours is the maximum that children are supposed to be detained, especially when separated by their parents, according to federal law. Some of the children had been held in this overcrowded facility for more than three weeks. AP said. 
“In my 22 years of doing visits with children in detention, I have never heard of this level of inhumanity,” said attorney Holly Cooper, co-director of the Immigration Law Clinic at the University of California, Davis, to AP.
Moreover, the detention and the conditions combined are causing lasting trauma, said Dr. Julie Linton, co-chairwoman of the American Academy of Pediatrics Immigrant Health Special Interest Group.
“Those facilities are anything but child friendly,” Linton told AP. “That type of environment is not only unhealthy for children but also unsafe.”

