America’s Natural Gas Hurdles
By Agnia Grigas
Jan. 30, 2018

Despite American sanctions against Russian natural gas producers, a cargo of liquefied natural gas that was most likely produced at Russia’s Yamal plant arrived in Boston this past weekend.

This development would seem to fly in the face of the sanctions imposed by President Barack Obama in 2014, though those restrictions apply to the financiers and producers of Russian oil and natural gas, not the output. But the arrival of the gas in the Northeast after frigid temperatures does raise questions about whether President Trump’s efforts to pursue American energy dominance in the world are falling short.

The journey of this liquefied natural gas from the Yamal Peninsula in northern Siberia to Boston may at first appear like a well-orchestrated move from the Kremlin playbook to hide what might be an embarrassing delivery for the United States. On Dec. 8, President Vladimir Putin oversaw the opening of Yamal L.N.G., Russia’s second liquefied natural gas plant. The project was personal for Mr. Putin for several reasons.

First, despite being the largest natural gas exporter in the world, Russia has ranked only seventh as an exporter of liquefied natural gas, and Yamal is expected to improve the country’s position (the United States is expected to be the third-largest L.N.G. exporter by 2020).

Second, Yamal’s completion signaled a small Kremlin victory over Washington — the majority owner of the plant is Novatek, which is one of the energy companies hit by the 2014 financial sanctions over Russia’s actions in Ukraine. While the aim was to derail Yamal’s construction, in the end, the plant was financed by Russian and Chinese banks and its output never faced sanctions.

Thus it was under the proud eyes of Mr. Putin that the first cargo from Yamal L.N.G. was loaded into the Russian icebreaker/tanker Christophe de Margerie (named after the recently deceased chief executive the French energy company Total, which holds a 20 percent interest in the project.) The cargo was initially intended for Asia, but as gas prices soared in Britain, it made its way to the Isle of Grain terminal near London on Dec. 28.

Here the gas was briefly stored but never made its way to the British grid. On Dec. 30, the French energy company Engie’s Gaselys tanker picked up cargo and set off for Boston, where gas prices were soaring because of the cold winter.

Because the time between the unloading of the Russian vessel and loading of the Gaselys vessel at Grain was brief, it is safe to assume that the Gaselys vessel was carrying at least some, if not all, of the Russian gas from the Yamal L.N.G. project. The storage facility in London might also have been holding L.N.G. from other producers. Nonetheless the Russia news media has gloated over this gas delivery to Boston and claimed it as Russian.

In the globalizing natural gas markets, we can expect more of these trades. Once, natural gas was primarily a regional resource delivered by land-based pipelines, but in recent years, there has been a rapid growth in the shipping of natural gas in liquefied form across the globe. Indeed, another shipment of Russian liquefied natural gas via France is expected to arrive in New England in February.


If the United States plans to continue imposing sanctions on Russia and its energy sector, it should consider how to approach output from projects like Yamal L.N.G. This is because the original source of such gas will become increasingly difficult to determine as the trade becomes more global. The gas can be loaded and unloaded multiple times and its carrier redirected to various destinations while at sea.

At the same time, the United States should not restrict L.N.G. exports to meet domestic demand. Such exports benefit American allies that have been dependent on imports from hostile state-owned monopolies like Russia’s Gazprom.

In addition, the federal government and private sector need to reassess the need for pipelines, storage facilities and L.N.G. export terminals as the Midwest and Northeast become powerhouses for natural gas production.

Bottlenecks in the natural gas pipeline network this winter led to significant increases in oil-fired and dual-fuel electricity generation to meet energy demands in New England. That development demonstrates the importance, despite grass-roots environmental opposition, of building pipelines connecting the Appalachia gas-producing region — namely the Marcellus and Utica shale gas reserves — with New England markets. Otherwise, New England is likely to continue to have the nation’s highest energy prices and remain dependent on L.N.G. imports and burning oil.

Moreover, Washington and industry need to re-evaluate the 1920 Jones Act, which stipulates that shipping between United States ports must be on American built, registered and crewed vessels. None of the vessels carrying L.N.G. from the Gulf Coast meet this requirement and thus cannot supply New England with domestic gas.

President Trump could waive the law during peaks of energy demand as he did for Puerto Rico relief efforts following Hurricane Maria. Ideally, the private sector would launch a fleet of complying American L.N.G. vessels, though operations of American flag vessels tend to be nearly three times more expensive than foreign ones.

We also need to end the environmentally and economically costly practice of flaring — the burning off of gas produced as a byproduct of oil and gas extraction that releases carbon dioxide and methane into the atmosphere. Instead, equipment should be installed so that this gas can be collected for use.

These changes would strengthen America’s domestic energy sector, limit calls to curtail America’s L.N.G. exports, reduce the need for imports, and help the country compete with Russia in the global natural gas markets.

Policy and infrastructure has not kept pace in the United States as the country has sought to turn into a net exporter of natural gas. But with thoughtful legislation and investments in infrastructure, the United States has the resources, technology and ambition to claim a position as the global leader in the coming golden age of natural gas.

Days later, when the team captured a male in a mist net, Dr. Filardi gasped. “One of the most poorly known birds in the world was there, in front of me, like a creature of myth come to life,” he wrote in a dispatch to the museum.

While the expedition was still underway, the museum released the first photographs of the bird, which seemed to be mugging for the camera. The mustached kingfisher became a viral celebrity, under headlines like “ridiculously gorgeous.”

It wasn’t until the public realized that Dr. Filardi had “collected” the bird — killing it for the museum’s research collection — that the adulation turned to venom.

Marc Bekoff, a researcher focusing on animal consciousness at the University of Colorado, Boulder, fumed on HuffPost that killing “‘in the name of education’ or ‘in the name of whatever’ simply needs to stop.” He added, “It is wrong and sets a horrific precedent for future research and for children.”

Colleen O’Brien, a director at PETA, condemned it as “perverse, cruel and the sort of act that has led to the extinction of other animals who were also viewed as ‘specimens.’” All that was needed to document the bird, she argued, was “compassion, awe and a camera, not disregard and a death warrant.”

While Dr. Filardi was still on the mountain, almost entirely off the grid, the rage spread. Tens of thousands of people signed petitions that condemned his actions, and thousands more signed a petition calling for him to be fired, or even jailed.

The museum frantically tried to reach him. People were trying to hack into his Facebook account, which was quickly disabled. The pages of his children were targeted. His wife began receiving phone calls with death threats, at all hours of the night. A petition that stated, “Chris Filardi is a disgrace and frankly does not deserve to breathe another breath,” was signed by 3,798 people.

He descended from the mountaintop into an inferno of hate. “If they wanted to make me feel horrible and more than a little frightened for my family or welfare,” he told me, his voice strained, “it worked.”

When he returned to the museum in New York, police officers told him to “be conscious” of how he entered it, never walking in the front door with the rest of the public, but using a back door instead.

Dr. Filardi hoped the threats were just talk, but he kept thinking back to May 2001, when an eco-terrorist group known as the Earth Liberation Front firebombed the Center for Urban Horticulture at the University of Washington, where Dr. Filardi was a graduate student. The bombing was aimed at the work of a professor they mistakenly believed was releasing genetically engineered poplar trees into the wild. (No one was hurt.)

Still, Dr. Filardi wanted to engage, if only to defend his field and the museum, which he had been visiting since his childhood. “I felt like a failed ambassador of the natural sciences,” he told me.

He wrote an essay for Audubon explaining the many steps he’d taken to ensure that the taking of a single kingfisher would not cause harm, including a survey of the population, which he estimated at 4,000 — a “robust number for a large island bird.” He highlighted the role the bird played in conservation efforts: After his findings were presented to tribal, local and national officials, they resolved to protect the area from being mined or logged.

His essay received over 900 comments, the most up-voted of which called him a murderer.

The mustached kingfisher was not gathered for public display, as a “trophy,” as many claimed. It resides in a carefully maintained part of the museum dedicated to research alongside nearly a million other ornithological specimens, none of which spawned death threats.

Some of the birds in the world’s museum and university collections were gathered before the word “scientist” was even coined. The naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace described them as the “individual letters” that “make up one of the volumes of our earth’s history.” Each scientific advance — the discovery of the nucleus, viruses, genes, DNA — has led to new ways of studying the same historic birds.

These collections have also directly contributed to policies that have helped wildlife. The pesticide DDT was ultimately banned after a comparison of museum egg specimens revealed that shells had grown thinner after it was introduced. A study of 120 years’ worth of seabird skins demonstrated rising levels of mercury in the ocean.

The collections almost certainly hold answers to questions that researchers haven’t yet thought to pose about the changes happening to our planet. And in this age of the Sixth Extinction, the collections are becoming even more vital.

When I asked Dr. Filardi whether he could have obtained what he needed for research by simply plucking a feather — a suggestion made by many online — he bristled. “All a feather gets you is DNA, and that’s not a magic wand!” With the specimen, though, “we have RNA, a skeleton, gonads, tissues in cryogenic storage.”

He continued, “In 100 years, there’s going to be all sorts of ways to utilize this that we don’t even know yet.”

This is not just his opinion, but the overwhelming consensus among field biologists. After a 2014 article in Science suggested that specimen collection might play a role in species extinction unless a code of ethics was adopted, over 100 museum and university researchers signed a strident rebuttal, outlining the rigorous legal and ethical guidelines already governing collecting.

Those condemning a scientist for killing one bird might first wrestle with the fact that American house cats kill as many as four billion backyard birds a year. An additional 600 million to 900 million birds slam into our buildings. The mining of rare metals used to build the very phones and computers that Dr. Filardi’s detractors used to call for his head endanger the survival of birds and other creatures those people claim to defend.

It’s also no coincidence that the uproar seems reserved for only the most beautiful animals. The same month that Dr. Filardi’s life was upended, a team led by Jake Esselstyn of Louisiana State University discovered a new species, the hog-nosed rat, on the Indonesian island of Sulawesi. The rat, which has uniquely long pubic hair, was killed and preserved for future research, but there are no petitions calling for Dr. Esselstyn’s firing.

In the end, it was Dr. Filardi’s children — who had grown up in the age of cyberbullying — who reassured him that the online threats were unlikely to translate into real-world violence. They helped him understand what he described as “the nameless ease with which people can violently assault and denigrate, to feed a sense of righteousness” before moving on to their next digital target.

Although Facebook and Twitter have outlined the types of threats — murder, sexual assault and breaking bones — that violate their rules, the burden is usually on those being threatened to flag the comments. Moderators are overwhelmed, and punishments are often as mild as a “time out.” Artificial intelligence isn’t a magical fix, either: Last fall, a Japanese Twitter user’s account was frozen after what was probably an algorithm flagged him for tweeting a death threat at a mosquito.

Nine months after he discovered the mustached kingfisher, Dr. Filardi left the American Museum of Natural History. He told me that he was worried about doing damage to an institution that he loved — people were threatening to pull donations — but that he was not pushed out. He still collaborates with the museum and with Conservation International, and has just returned to the Solomon Islands with a new organization.

Before he left for the islands, he told me he was “not bitter” about what had happened.

“I understand and empathize with the challenge of confronting the taking of another life to feed the intellect of humans,” he said. “I try to give people the benefit of the doubt.”

But I couldn’t help but be outraged on his behalf that people claiming to act in wildlife’s name had ruthlessly harassed someone who had done more than most of us to understand and protect the natural world. And I worried about the effect of that harassment on other scientists in his field.

Van Remsen, the curator of birds at Louisiana State University’s Museum of Natural Science, told me that the Filardi affair hasn’t changed his mind about the importance of collecting. “Almost every kingfisher that has ever lived has suffered a more painful death than the one Filardi collected, either being eaten alive by a predator or from the inside by a disease,” he said. “If we thought for a second that what we were doing is wrong in terms of hurting populations, we wouldn’t be doing it.”

But it has led him — and many other ornithologists with whom I spoke, almost all of whom asked me not to use their names — to be extremely cautious about attracting any kind of attention. Many research expeditions are no longer being publicized; in some cases, there is a total blackout on media. As a result, the public will grow even less informed about the importance of this research.

You can’t blame the scientists. One distinguished ornithologist lamented the new culture of fear. “Some crazy vegan lady just shot up YouTube,” he said. “Who knows what could happen?”



