InterOil says finds big gas reserves in PNG

 SYDNEY  (Reuters) - Canadian oil firm InterOil Corp. IOL.TO said on Tuesday a gas and condensate discovery in Papua New Guinea could hold at least 4 trillion cubic feet of gas, potentially the biggest discovery in the Pacific nation. 

 Chief Executive Phil Mulacek told Reuters the Elk-1 field, would be developed for a US$3 billion liquefied natural gas (LNG) joint venture between InterOil, Merrill Lynch Commodities (Europe) Ltd. and private equity group Clarion Finanz AG. "Third parties have said that the flow of the Elk-1 well is bigger than anything they have seen in North West Shelf," Mulacek said in a phone interview. "The indicative tests show that it field has at least 4 trillion cubic feet of gas and could underpin an LNG development." "So far, all tests results show that this could potentially be the biggest discovery in the history of Papua New Guinea," he said. While analysts in Canada said the discovery is promising, it is too soon to say if the Elk-1 find would be similar in size to recent discoveries such as Woodside Petroleum's Ltd. WPT.AX Pluto field in Australia, which has 4.1 trillion cubic feet of gas. Papua New Guinea's proven gas reserves are over 15 trillion cubic feet. "The (reserve) thickness is very, very encouraging, the pressure is abnormally high, and probably double what you would expect for a discovery this deep," said Rob Moss, oil and gas analyst at Acumen Capital Partners in Calgary. "To suggest there could be several trillion cubic feet, given the information currently available, is perhaps a little opportunistic," Moss said. SHARES SOAR News of the find sent InterOil's shares soaring on the Toronto Stock Exchange. The stock hit an intraday high of C$28.99 and closed 23.6 percent higher at C$27.93. The stock has advanced nearly 60 percent over the past six months. "You can make projections and show possibilities, but I think it's way too early to quantify what kind of find is in the ground," said Ira Zadikow, analyst at Great Eastern Securities. "It definitely increases the assets of InterOil, but if they don't have a way of distributing it, or transporting it, or marketing it -- it doesn't do a thing for its revenues." Mulacek said the company will drill more wells on the Elk field and at nearby prospects to determine the size of the discovery. The final results of the appraisal are expected to be released in the first half of 2007 and first deliveries are scheduled for early 2012, InterOil said. A company drilling update on Monday said preliminary tests showed the field recording a gas flow of 21.7 million standard cubic feet per day at a flowing bottom hole pressure of 3,590 psi. The hole is 1,624 meters deep. Mulacek added that preliminary tests indicate that there could also be a layer of oil under the gas and condensates. Marketing of the LNG will be mainly handled by Merrill Lynch, which is supplying gas to customers in the United States, where it has access to pipelines and a LNG import terminal in Louisiana. The LNG project will also be targeting customers in Australia and North Asia, he said. InterOil, Merrill Lynch and Clarion Finanz each have about 30 percent stake in the joint venture. InterOil is expected to report its third-quarter earnings results after the Canadian market closes on Tuesday. ($1=1.139 Canadian Dollar) (Additional reporting by  Jonathan Spicer  in Canada)