
Not so hospitable  waiters on their restaurant horror stories
There was outrage when it was suggested a waiter should pay towards the bill of diners who had done a runner. We asked readers to share their most memorable experiences of working in bars and restaurants

Stuart Heritage and 
Guardian readers


Mon 17 Jun 2019 19.00BST


Last modified on Tue 18 Jun 2019 11.50BST


This weekend it emerged that the restaurant chain Wahaca asked a waiter to pay back part of a bill after his customers left without paying. Although Wahaca later decided against doing so  blaming the incident on an internal communications issue and amending its eat-and-run policy  it shows that service-industry workers have got it bad. The Guardian asked readers for their experiences. Here are some of the most egregious responses, which have been published anonymously at their request.
Hi @wahaca just eaten in your Kentish Town restaurant for the last time.Ppl next to us left without paying and their server is made to foot the bill from his wages. Apparently company policy. Utterly shameful employment practice. Food's great, company is crap.@thomasinamiers
He told me I had to pay the tables bill or I couldnt leaveLate 2017. I was new at TGI Fridays and had my first runners. Theyd been a nice enough table, but theyd been angry at the long wait for food and then, when it came, the food itself. That was a regular thing. At the end of the night, I was cashing out and one of my managers came over to discuss the run. His management style was horrid  putting people down, patronising them, goading them in front of customers  and he hated me. He told me it was my fault and I had to pay the tables bill or I wouldnt be able to leave the restaurant. I voiced my disapproval, but he stood his ground and so I began to count the 70 bill out of my tips and own money. It was only when another manager intervened and spoke to the first manager and said that wasnt store policy that I realised I was being bullied. 22-year-old man, London
I had to mop up a pool of a blood with one-ply tissueI worked part-time in a restaurant while studying in college. The manager took a strong dislike to me because I was a little bit less experienced than the other waiting staff. On a particularly busy night, I heard him scream at me from across the restaurant  a drunk man had fallen from his stool and hit his head and split his lip open. Blood was everywhere, and my manager told me to clean it up. When I asked for gloves and a mop he gestured to some kitchen towel before disappearing behind the bar downstairs. Naively, I did it, as I didnt want to lose my job. I had to mop up a pool of this drunk old mans blood with one-ply tissue, on my hands and knees, in a busy restaurant. It was humiliating and I only realised how dangerous it was when a man who was drinking there approached me, told me he was a nurse and warned me to never let them make me do something like this again. I quit soon afterwards, but it haunts me to this day. 23-year-old woman, Dublin
She told me I needed to be prettier 