13 ways Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's relationship is different than Prince William and Duchess Kate's
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's relationship is quite different than Duchess Kate and Prince William's.
For starters, the two couples met under very different circumstances — Kate and William were originally friends while Harry and Meghan were set up on a date.
Harry and Meghan often show PDA but William and Kate don't.
The age difference is also different between the two couples.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's wedding is shaping up to be very different from Prince William and Duchess Kate's — and their nuptials are just one example of how they're doing things their own way. Click through to see 13 differences between the two royal couples.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's Origin Story
Prince William and Kate Middleton became friends back in 2001, when they were students in residence at St. Salvator's Hall at the University of St. Andrews. Both dated other people before falling in love with each other in late 2003.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's Origin Story
Unlike Will and Kate, Prince Harry and Meghan Markle were romantic from the start. They were set up on a blind date by a mutual friend and pretty much jumped right into a relationship.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's Courtship
When Prince William and Kate Middleton said "I do" in 2011, they had been fixtures in each other's lives for a decade and dating for almost as long (with a brief breakup in 2007).
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's Courtship
In contrast, Prince Harry had known Meghan Markle for less than a year-and-a-half when he proposed in November 2017.
Duchess Kate's Royal Expertise
Having grown up in England, Duchess Kate knew the British monarchy well. There's even evidence that her ancestors on her father's side were acquainted with and played host to the royal family.
Meghan Markle's Royal Expertise
In their first post-engagement interview, Meghan Markle told the BBC that she didn't "grow up with [an] understanding of the royal family" because she's from the US. "Everything that I've learned about him, I learned through him, as opposed to having grown up around different news stories," she said.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's Long-Distance Relationship
Prince William and Duchess Kate were in the same town — and even the same house — for a good part of their early romance. That made it difficult, though, when William was stationed with the Household Cavalry at Bovington Barracks in Dorset. According to reports, the distance and time apart took a toll, and they split briefly in 2007. Thankfully, they found their way back to each other a few months later, and have been happily coupled up ever since.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's Long-Distance Relationship
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle were long-distance from the very beginning of their romance. Markle was busy shooting her final season of "Suits" in Toronto, while Harry carried out his royal duties in the UK. In their post-engagement interview with the BBC, the couple admitted it was tricky logistically but said they made it work by flying back and forth and never going more than two weeks apart.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's PDA
There's a reason you rarely see Prince William and Duchess Kate hold hands in public. While there's no official rule against PDA, reports suggest that Prince William — who is second in line to the throne, several spots ahead of Prince Harry, who is sixth — tends to follow the queen's lead on such matters.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's PDA
Unlike the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, Prince Harry and Meghan Markle are very affectionate in public, and are often photographed holding hands or linking arms at official events.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's Proposal Story
Prince William proposed in the fall of 2010, when he and Kate Middleton were on holiday in Kenya with some friends.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's Proposal Story
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle have been on their fair share of romantic trips — they spent five days in Botswana just a few weeks after their first date — but Harry popped the question on a quiet night at home, when they were "trying" to roast a chicken.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's Engagement Age
Prince William and Duchess Kate were 28 when they got engaged in 2010. He was still 28 when they married the next April; she was 29.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's Engagement Age
When he got engaged to Meghan Markle, Prince Harry was 33 — five years older than Prince William was when he proposed to Kate. Markle was 36.
Duchess Kate's Career
When Kate Middleton left her position at her parents' party-supply company to assume her royal duties in 2011, her departure was handled mostly behind the scenes
Meghan Markle's Career
Meghan Markle's career change, on the other hand, has been very public — because her career itself was very public. In addition to acting, she ran a lifestyle blog called The Tig, which she shut down once she started dating Prince Harry. After they announced their engagement, she confirmed that she would be quitting acting, too, thus ending her seven-season run as a series regular on Suits.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's First Royal Christmas
In keeping with tradition, Kate Middleton didn't join the royals at Queen Elizabeth II's Sandringham Estate for the holidays until after she and William were married. She spent Christmas with her own family even after they were engaged.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's First Royal Christmas
In contrast, Meghan Markle was invited to Sandringham for the holidays in 2017, just a little over a month after she accepted Harry's proposal.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's First Royal Engagement
Kate Middleton joined Prince William at the Thursford Christmas Spectacular about a month after they announced their plans to marry, but their official debut at a royal function wasn't until February 24, 2011, three months post-engagement, when Middleton joined her then-fiancé in Anglesey, North Wales, to christen a lifeboat.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's First Royal Engagement
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle made their official debut within days, not months, of their engagement news. Markle joined Harry in Nottingham, England, for a World AIDS Day charity fair hosted by the Terrence Higgins Trust.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's Age Difference
In both brothers' relationships, the princes are younger than their respective significant others. However, the age difference is considerably bigger for one couple. Duchess Kate was born on January 9, 1982, while Prince William was born on June 21, 1982, making him five months younger than his wife.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's Age Difference
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's age gap is wider. Markle was born on August 4, 1981, three years before Prince Harry's birth on September 15, 1984.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's Wedding
rince William and Duchess Kate's April 2011 wedding was a grand event that included a ceremony at Westminster Abbey, dignitaries from around the world, a carriage procession through London, and that iconic Buckingham Palace balcony kiss.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's Wedding
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's wedding will be incredible, but it won't be as big as Will and Kate's. The ceremony will be held at the relatively modest (but still stunning) St. George's Chapel, no politicians have been invited, and there will be no balcony kiss at Buckingham Palace. There will be a carriage procession through Windsor, though.
Prince William and Duchess Kate's Social Media Presence
The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge have a fairly significant Twitter and Instagram presence now, thanks to Kensington Palace's official accounts, but prior to 2014, any announcements about them were made the old-fashioned way, through official press releases and statements in the media, or via the Twitter accounts set up for Clarence House and the royal family at large.
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's Social Media Presence
The royal family still issues official statements and press releases about both couples, but more often than not, the public learns of big developments via Kensington Palace's Twitter. Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's engagement announcement, for example, appeared first on social media, and new wedding details are posted every few days or so.
