One minute, you’re a top-rated high school basketball prospect, with the NBA very much in your reach. The next, you’re undergoing back surgery, facing months of rehab and, eventually, working your way back to play one game in the NCAA tournament with Missouri before declaring for the NBA draft and going under the microscope of scouts, franchises and pundits.

Can you imagine what comes with that? Though there’s the uncertainty every NBA prospect faces, there are also reports about your health and the rumors about your workouts.

For Porter, it can be awkward.

“It’s funny because so much stuff isn’t true,” he told For The Win on Monday while in New York City to promote his partnership with Autotrader. “I read so much of that stuff about me and people are reporting stuff … ‘Dang I didn’t even know this is happening to me!'”

“People were talking about how I couldn’t get out of bed,” he continued, referring to reports about a recent canceled workout. “No, I got out of bed, I went to the workout but my hip was a little sore. I told (agent) Mark (Bartelstein) and he said shut it down for a couple of days, just being safe. He’s a really cautious guy, really has the best interests in me in mind. It’s tough, sometimes you want to tweet back: ‘No, that’s not what happened.’ You just have to let people say what they want to say and at the end of the day, you’ll be alright.”

Here’s more from our conversation (which has been edited and condensed):

What are you up to with Autotrader?
I partnered with them because I don’t know a lot about cars. When I go to a city, a car’s going to be one of my first big purchases. They’re going to help me out.

What kind of car might you want?
A Tesla. I’m not sure yet. I just don’t know a lot about cars, but they look cool.

What’s the last year been like for you?
It’s been a roller coaster for sure. I think it would be tough for some people to go through what I went through – you’re at the top with everybody talking about you, and then you got hurt and everybody’s talking about other people. I was never jealous, it was just something I had to get through. I had great people around me keeping it positive. I’m doing great today and I think it was just part of the plan.

Did you think your NBA dreams were gone for good?
I don’t care who you are, if you’re Kobe Bryant. When you get hurt like that, there are days when you’re like, “Dang, did my dreams get taken from me?” After that happens, then you’re like, “What do I have to do to get better?” There were hard days but I knew this was my destiny to be in the NBA. I wouldn’t be given the gift of basketball to have it taken away from me.

What did you do on those days you felt at your lowest?
My family and people around me kept me positive. I read my Bible and understood there’s a plan for everything. It’s just having perspective: At the end of the day, basketball is a lot, but it’s not everything. If it got taken away from me, that’s not the end of the world. Life is a lot bigger than that.