Mr. Osomatsu's Unaired Episode Outlined
posted on 2015-12-27 05:20 UTC-8 by Jabulani Blyden

The official website for Mr. Osomatsu (Osomatsu-san) revealed information regarding an unaired Episode 3.5 on Tuesday. 
The episode will be available on the Mr. Osomatsu Volume 1 Blu-Ray and DVD on January 29.
Episode 3.5 will feature two short segments titled "Matsu Soup" and "Virgin Hero."

The website describes "Matsu Soup,"
One day, the Matsuno boys are greeted by a morning different from usual... 
A special day for them begins.

The website describes "Virgin Hero,"
One day, Choromatsu discovers a group of college students enjoying a barbecue. 
But he feels inferior next to these college students who live in a different (?) world. 
What's revealed is...

Episode 3.5 replaces the Episode 1, which was removed from streaming sites in Japan on November 12. 
Crunchyroll removed the episode on November 11.

In addition, the website announced that the title for the new segment 
that will be included in Episode 3 is "Real Matsu." 
The third episode has been partially altered from its original broadcast version.

In a press conference on October 29, Yuichi Takahashi of TV Tokyo apologized for the series' third episode. 
The episode contained a parody of the Anpanman children's anime character, 
which has since been removed on Crunchyroll and other streaming services. 
Episode 1 also included a number of parodies.

Japan does not have a parody exception or provision in its copyright law. 
Therefore, making parodies of copyrighted works may illegally violate a copyright owners' 
"right to maintain integrity," if performed without the copyright holder's prior consent.

The DVD and Blu-ray will also include "Shiritori", the first in a series of bonus short films.
The official Twitter account for the Mr. Osomatsu anime 
announced last month that the series will run for two consecutive seasons. 
The second half will begin in January.

The series premiered on October 5. Crunchyroll streamed the series as it aired in Japan.
Fujio Akatsuka's original Osomatsu-kun manga and "high tension comedy" TV anime centered on the Matsuno household, 
which has six naughty and mischievous sons (who are sextuplets). 
All of the sextuplets, including the eldest Osomatsu, are all in love with the same girl, 
Totoko. 
The original series followed the family when the sons were 10 years old. 
The show re-imagines the original manga and TV anime with the sextuplets as adults.

Akatsuka launched the Osomatsu-kun manga in Shogakukan's Weekly Shonen Sunday magazine in 1962, 
and the manga ran in the magazine until 1969. 
The manga then ran in Weekly Shonen King from 1972-1973, 
and then in Comic BonBon from 1987-1990. 
The compiled manga volumes have more than 10 million copies in print.
