Johnny Depp sued for 'punching crew member twice in the ribs'
Johnny Depp is being sued by a crew member after allegedly punching him on the set of a movie about the killing of Tupac and Notorious BIG.
Gregg "Rocky" Brooks, a location manager, claims the 55-year-old actor screamed obscenities at him, hit him twice in the ribs, and then offered him money to punch him back.
Documents filed in Los Angeles on Monday say the incident occurred outside the Barclay Hotel in April 2017 during filming for City Of Lies.
According to Mr Brooks, the production team had permission to film until 7pm outside the hotel and until 10pm inside the building.
Despite being granted an extension, Mr Brooks says he finally had to ask the film's director - Brad Furman - to wrap filming for the day.
He alleges Mr Furman asked him: "Why don't you tell that to Johnny Depp?"
Mr Brooks says that rather than approach Depp directly, he attempted to talk to an on-site police officer, but was apprehended by Depp who he says shouted: "Who the f*** are you? You have no right to tell me what to do!"
Depp is then alleged to have said: "I don't give a f*** who you are and you can't tell me what to do."
It is at this point Mr Brooks alleges Depp punched him twice in the rib cage.
He said the actor responded to his "composure" after being physically attacked by challenging him to hit him back.
Documents allege Depp said: "I will give you $100,000 (£75,000) to punch me in the face right now."
It is at this point that Depp's bodyguards are said to have removed the actor from the set.
Additionally, Mr Brooks claims he was wrongfully sacked from the production a week later, after refusing to sign papers promising not to sue the production company.
He is seeking undisclosed damages from Depp, director Brad Furman, producer Miriam Segal and the production company Good Film Productions.
Depp is currently fighting an ongoing legal battle with his ex-managers and former lawyers, claiming they cheated him out of millions of dollars.