Upper West Side tenants go months without gas, problems with lights
Chrystalia Matthias gets light in one room of her Upper West Side apartment. She’s had no gas since October. The floors sag beneath her feet from a leaky ceiling.
She’s starting to get the feeling that her landlord doesn’t want her there — and she’s worried it won’t end well.
Matthias is 73 and has lived in the same third-floor, one-bedroom railroad flat on Columbus Ave. near W. 105th St. since 1980. Her rent is $569.51 a month. She has working light fixtures in her kitchen, no fixtures in her bedroom and a broken one in the living room.
“I just hope I don’t fall. It’s been a long time — I’ve been without light since the 90?s,” she said. “I use the flashlight on my cell phone to get around.”
The retired healthcare worker has been going without gas, too. Since her apartment stopped getting gas in October, she stopped paying rent. Instead, she puts the money in escrow and is seeking relief in housing court.
But it doesn’t seem that has created much incentive to get her landlords, or the city, or Con Edison to remedy her situation.
Her landlords, brothers Javier and Alex Melendez, blame the gas and electric company. The two run a liquor store on the first floor of the building, which they’ve owned since 1987.
“We had a gas leak and Con Ed shut it down,” said Javier Melendez. “We had to change the gas lines throughout the building. We spent over $60,000 to replace them, but Con Edison has never followed up on it.”
Con Ed pointed its finger at the landlords.
“We shut the service off due to a leak in October,” Con Ed spokesman Alfonso Quiroz said. “We’ll install the new service line, but first the landlord must complete certain work that will make it possible for the building to take gas.”
Once the work is done, Quiroz explained, Con Ed will finish the job.
A spokesman for the city Buildings Department said the agency granted a licensed plumber “gas authorization” in April for work completed at the building, but Con Ed ultimately has to make the final decision about turning on the gas.
In the interim, Matthias and her downstairs neighbor Sandra Walker suffer. An examination of city Housing Preservation and Development Department records show there are 104 open violations on the building, some of them dating back as early as 1990. An HPD spokesman said the agency can use open violations to bring cases to housing court.
But Lana Pelletier McCrea, a lawyer for Matthias and Walker, said it didn’t do that, so Goddard Riverside Law Project, the organization for which she works, did. They are now awaiting an October hearing where a judge is expected to decide whether to hold the landlords in civil and criminal contempt for failing to remedy the situation.
For Walker, getting relief, or not, could have serious health consequences. She said her doctor told her that the mold and vermin-infested apartment in which she lives is no good for her asthma and hypertension.
Like her neighbor, her floors need to be replaced and her stove doesn’t work.
“It’s stressful. There’s work that needs to be done, and the landlord isn’t cooperating,” Walker said.
Javier Melendez denied this, pointing to the hot plates he distributed as proof. “I’ve provided everyone who wanted it with a hot plate,” he said. He also brushed aside Matthias’ complaints about insufficient lighting. “Anyone who says they don’t have electricity is a liar,” he said.
Matthias said she only has working outlets in the kitchen and stretches an extension cord to a lamp in the living room but she claims it’s a hazard. Her bedroom, living room and bathroom have no outlets or light fixtures.
Javier Melendez said they’ve tried to send contractors to work on the apartment but Matthias is uncooperative.
Both Javier and Alex Melendez said they are going to move her into another apartment.
Matthias said she continues to need her cell phone flashlight, and that the hot plate she received didn’t take long to short circuit. Since then, she’s had to eat out.
“I’m just really uptight about the whole thing. I’ve been asking them for help since the 90s,” she said. “He’s definitely trying to get me out.”