NAACP New York head Hazel Dukes backs Mayor de Blasio control of NYC schools
NAACP New York president Hazel Dukes issued an open letter in support of Mayor de Blasio’s control of the city’s public schools on Wednesday.
Lawmakers in Albany are currently considering changes to increase the role of parents in state law governing de Blasio’s control of the schools, which is set to expire in June.
But Dukes, a civil rights icon who’s come out in favor of mayoral control of New York City schools before, writes that de Blasio should maintain authority over the massive system because it boosts accountability.
“He is accountable to parents and local political leaders in a way that the many school boards and committees that used to oversee the city’s schools were not,” Dukes wrote of de Blasio. “Complicated bureaucracies can ignore a community’s voice because no one person can be held responsible.”
Dukes cites rising graduation rates and falling suspensions as evidence that mayoral control of the schools, instituted by Mayor Michael Bloomberg in 2002, works better than the school board model that preceded it.
She joins a number of influential groups and individuals who have come out in support of de Blasio’s control, including media executive Barry Diller, supermarket magnate John Catsimatidis, Partnership for New York City CEO Kathryn Wylde, and many more.
But de Blasio, who has argued that mayoral control should be made permanent, has tussled with powerful politicians in Albany over the matter, and his control of the schools hit a snag when it expired and lapsed for a brief time in 2017.
Gov. Cuomo and state legislators granted de Blasio a two-year extension when they reinstated mayoral control that year. De Blasio has said he believes he’s up for a three-year extension this time around.
Sources in Albany say de Blasio’s control of city schools will likely be renewed, but hinted that there may be new limits imposed.
State Sen. John Liu (D-Queens), who’s chairman of the Senate’s New York City Education Committee, has said that legislators are considering tweaks to allow for more parental involvement. Some lawmakers also want admissions reform at the city’s specialized high schools.
De Blasio also faces local pressure over the arrangement.
A group representing the city’s influential local school boards opposes a renewal of mayoral control unless significant limits are placed.
The leaders of the city’s Education Council Consortium, which includes members from the city’s 32 local school districts — and four citywide councils — want the Legislature to consider a list of checks on City Hall’s power over city classrooms.
Consortium co-chair Shino Tanikawa said families should have a greater say in the public schools.
“It’s not about de Blasio, it’s about whether one man or woman should have power to make all the decisions about the public schools,” Tanikawa said. “We need checks and balances.”
“Wait just saw news our baby boy came but that’s not true! It’s Met Monday, I’m in NYC,” she tweeted on Monday. “I would be at the hospital lol.”
She was accompanied by West at that swanky affair.
