
Brexit and Britains broken democracy
Letters


Tue 18 Jun 2019 17.25BST


Last modified on Tue 18 Jun 2019 18.14BST


John Harris is spot on in his analysis of our busted political system (Any new prime minister is sunk if they dont fix Britains democracy, 17 June). It is no longer an anorak issue to seek to establish a written constitution of revised representative democracy.
Central to this is the introduction of proportional representation in all our local, regional and national elections. This would create a multiparty parliament. However, rather than accepting messy coalitions as in most of Europe, we could have a separately elected premier with appropriate veto powers and checks and balances overseen by a constitutional court, so that a premier could attempt to pursue policies endorsed by an electoral mandate.
Our overly centralised state has enabled decades of abuses of power by governments ruthlessly exploiting the overweening power of No 10  through the royal prerogative and other such anachronisms, continually recreating Lord Hailshams elective dictatorship. We must devolve most of the states responsibilities to the lowest functional level, as Harris implies, creating federal provinces, nations and city-regions (such as Greater London) represented in a senate and empowering local government.
Never again, after we have resolved Brexit with another referendum, must we allow one where only 37% of the electorate purports to represent the settled will of the people. Citizens assemblies must be deployed to advise and support parliament. And MPs must reclaim their Burkeian imperative to represent and deliberate: not blindly follow media-whipped vox pops.. If we had had government by Twitter, we would have reintroduced hanging!Philip WoodKidlington, Oxfordshire
 There is only one thing I would disagree with in Fintan OTooles article (Brexit Britain is wallowing in corrosive levels of self-pity, 15 June). He interprets the view of the 90% agreeing that the way Britain is dealing with Brexit (is) a national humiliation as a verdict on humiliation by the EU. But I am one of the 90%  and for me, humiliation is the chest-beating antics of the complacent incompetents previously sent to negotiate with Brussels and now promising to do so again, the ignominy of having to answer the eternal question from other Europeans about why we are indulging in this act of collective madness and, above all, the horror of electing a man despised outside this country as a liar and charlatan as our next prime minister. The humiliation of this country is entirely self-inflicted.Ian RaganCheltenham, Gloucestershire
 Rather than looking at the percentage who did not vote remain, as suggested by Dr Harry Harmer (Letters, 17 June), the most interesting figure from the Brexit referendum result is that the leave majority, at 1,269,231, is very small. This is trounced by the 12,948,081 voters who did not indicate their preference either way, by not voting or by spoiling their ballot papers. The subsequent general election results confirmed this lack of a significant majority by returning a hung parliament. Something the new prime minister will still have to contend with.Marion HineFramlingham, Suffolk
 Tom Watson is right (Watson to Corbyn: Labour must lead the fight to prevent Brexit, 17 June). The irony of Corbyns stance is that his position claims to take account of leave-voting Labour voters. However, there is much evidence to suggest that this contingent (often male, white and over 55) is precisely the group that will no longer vote Labour while 