Nintendo Switch's Octopath Traveler: No Plans For DLC, Launching As A "Complete Game"
What you buy is everything you'll get.
Last updated by Jordan Ramée on June 19, 2018 at 8:12AM
In an interview with Dengeki Online, Octopath Traveler producer Masashi Takahashi said there is no planned DLC for the upcoming Switch title. "We haven't even thought of having DLC," Takahashi said, "The retail version is a complete game." Siliconera has the full interview translated into English.
Square Enix's Octopath Traveler is a turn-based RPG portrayed in a 2D pixelated aesthetic that's similar to what's seen in the developer's Bravely Default: Flying Fairy. Players begin as one of eight different adventurers before setting out on their journey. How the game begins is determined by which character the player starts as. Throughout Octopath Traveler's story, players encounter the seven other characters, each in the middle of their own journey, and can choose whether or not to recruit these characters and pursue their stories as well.
During the interview, Takahashi also said Octopath Traveler was always scheduled to launch on the Nintendo Switch, even though development of the game started well before anyone even knew of the console's existence. Square Enix and Nintendo's positive relationship, forged through the two companies' partnership on Bravely Default and its sequel, influenced Square Enix's decision to launch Octopath Traveler exclusively on Nintendo hardware.
Takahashi went on to deny the inclusion of any sort of New Game Plus mode, but added that Octopath Traveler's difficulty would evolve organically and make certain parts of the game harder based on player decisions. For example, it's possible to beat the entire campaign without recruiting a single character, but this limits the number of skills players will have access to when trying to interact with Octopath Traveler's world.
Takahashi also said that Octopath Traveler has a 50-60 hour story, but the game will take up to 100 hours for any completionists who want to tackle every side mission and optional dungeon.
Octopath Traveler is releasing for Nintendo Switch on July 13. During E3 2018, Square Enix announced a second demo for the game. You can play it right now.