
Hong Kongs struggle is ours too. Its a wake-up call to defend all basic human rights
The young activists aspirations  to assemble peacefully, to speak freely, to not be persecuted  are a universal cause
Contact author


Wed 19 Jun 2019 06.00BST


Last modified on Wed 19 Jun 2019 11.46BST


Why do the Hong Kong activists matter to us? Because their cause is universal. Aerial images of vast crowds flooding the streets of the skyscraper-studded island are of course riveting. Equally fascinating is that, with China fast emerging as a global behemoth and surveillance state, this crisis serves as a barometer of what we might next expect of it and its president-cum-new-emperor, Xi Jinping.
Theres also an astounding element of David versus Goliath in Hong Kong, something that awakens a deep instinct in us, a yearning to see bravery and determination in the face of great odds: young people defying a giant and leveraging surprising tactics in their struggle.
As coincidence has it, this is all happening shortly after weve marked the anniversary of Tiananmen, and rewatched the footage of that man single-handedly stopping a column of tanks in June 1989  an act of courage that remains a blockbuster. In Britain, there is of course particular interest in Hong Kong because of the colonial past, the 1997 handover, and responsibilities attached to it: the question of whether China will renege on its commitment to two systems looms large.
But something else is at work, something arguably more important than geopolitics, impressive TV pictures, heroic metaphors or whats left of one European countrys diplomatic clout. And its this: Hong Kong offers up to us basic human aspirations that anyone, anywhere, can recognise and relate to.
When the activist Joshua Wong was released this week, his first words were about fundamental rights and freedom. He didnt mention sovereignty, nor ethnicity, nor religious or cultural identity. As such, Hong Kongs activists serve as a reminder of universal principles that we have become almost numb to in the age of suspicion, conspiracy theories, fake news, moral relativism and identity politics. Weve become accustomed to thinking about rights from the perspective of a specific group, whatever its characteristics; but here are rights being fought for in universal terms: fundamental was the key word.
This points to what was enshrined in the international charters drawn up in the aftermath of the second world war, when a global liberal order was tentatively put in place. As the 1948 UN-adopted Universal Declaration of Human Rights puts it: All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights, and all are entitled to those rights and freedoms without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
Were stunned by the images of Hong Kong not just because of the scale of these events or their historical dimension, but also because they somehow shake us out of a lethargy. Had we not become blase or cynical or fatalistic about the chances of defending human rights? Had we not started flirting with the notion that some principles might work fine for our western world but can hardly be considered as imperatives for others? Would that be because of our own imperfect record, our past empires, our wars of choice, our western desolation in times of Donald Trump, Brexit, the far-right in Europe, 