
Mmm bap: the long search for the perfect burger bun
Every year since the 70s the burger bun has got fluffier, sweeter and more golden  from a squidgy, dull bap to a gleaming brioche. But where will it go from here?

Zoe Williams


Thu 20 Jun 2019 11.00BST


This is going to sound like a dream I had, but its true: I once travelled 200 miles to taste a doughnut burger. Instead of just one patty of ground meat, there were two, with bacon and untold gunk in between. More to the point, instead of a bun, there was a doughnut. The story was that there were as many calories as you ought to eat in a day, in this single burger, so how would you feel at the end of one of those?
The answer is, I felt fine. But the journey of the burger bun mystified me. Every year since the mid-70s, it has got higher, fluffier, more golden  unless it is charcoal, in which case it has got more sinister. Every year it has looked more like a gourmet item in its own right. And this increasing perfection has gone hand in hand with sweetness, so that you end up with a bun that is basically not very bread-like, that you would hesitate to eat at home because you would be thrown into confusion about whether you were having breakfast or high tea.
Most of the buns you find in shops and supermarkets remain old school  bready, not especially fluffy, extremely yielding in the hand. I love them for madeleine reasons: they remind me of other times Ive tasted them, very often in a garden, with people I am fond of. Domestically, you mostly serve burgers to people you like. Theyre food for intimates, because youre going to eat them with your hands and they will probably fall apart.
In pubs and restaurants, though, buns have gone full million-dollar smile. The original pub buns were highly processed, never went stale, tasted of nothing and were squidgy. I had nothing against these buns; I still dont mind a Wimpy. But what they didnt have was integrity: the bread changed composition on contact with the meat, became a kind of slick starchy layer. The old outrage of the 20th century  how food looked in adverts versus how it looked in real life  was largely down to these buns. They werent pillowy and didnt gleam. But pubs used them for years, following the not-broke-so-dont-fix-it module on their MBAs.
The quest for the perfect bun was always more fevered in the US, possibly because the burgers were bigger. By 2009, they were havering between the potato-starch roll  still the Shake Shack staple  and a cross between challah and a breakfast roll, which is basically on its way to the brioche. Over the same period in the UK, Byron Burger was launching and Meat Liquor was finding its feet, and both went through existential self-reflection on the matter of the bun. Brioche seemed very sweet for the everyday palate.
Then came Youngs standard brioche, devised by the pub chain and the Bread Factory bakery, and now the staple of most large pub chains. Oisin Rogers, a long-serving Youngs landlord, describes its traits: glazed top, the colour of an expensive persons tan, lots of sugar, cant freeze it, cant keep it for longer than a 