The Coach Who Can Explain Croatia’s World Cup Success
Ratko Rudic is a water-polo legend. He also happens to be Croatian. We asked the coach who led Croatia to an Olympic gold medal for his thoughts about the World Cup final.
MOSCOW—The World Cup final on Sunday against France is the single most important athletic event in the history of Croatia. And there is no one who understands that kind of pressure better than Ratko Rudic.

If you know anything about international water polo, you know the name Ratko Rudic. If, for some reason, you don’t know anything about international water polo, all you have to know about this Croatian legend is that he’s coached three different countries to four Olympic gold medals: Yugoslavia in 1984 and 1988, Italy in 1992 and none other than Croatia in 2012.

That gold medal in water polo was the crowning sports achievement for this country with half the population of New Jersey.

There has been no shortage of athletic highlights for such a tiny nation—two gold medals in team handball, a Wimbledon title for Goran Ivanisevic, a silver medal for the 1992 basketball team starring Drazen Petrovic in its first Olympics as an independent nation—but Croatia’s success in the pool stands alone. This is a country that takes so much pride in water polo that even the Croatian fans rabid enough to attend the World Cup final will come to the match in water-polo caps.

Rudic has some experience with the opposite phenomenon.

When he was hired to coach Brazil’s water polo team before the Rio Olympics, there was a small problem: The country didn’t know anything about water polo. Brazilians were as green as the Olympic pool. But what happened once Ratko Rudic worked his magic was an unforgettable week in which Brazil was briefly a global superpower in water polo. The host country that hadn’t won an Olympic match in at least a half-century started 3-0, including a monumental upset of the eventual gold medalist, and the locals packed into the aquatics stadium as if they were Croatians.

It made for a remarkable sight not least of all because they still had no idea what they were cheering about. Since they were clueless about water polo, they pretended it was a sport they were more familiar with. They wore soccer jerseys and sang about one national hero more popular than Ratko Rudic: some guy named Pele.

But their euphoria could not last forever. Brazil lost in the quarterfinals to another team of Rudic’s creation: Croatia.

There may not be a better coach in any sport than Rudic, who was recently lured out of retirement to coach the Italian club Pro Recco, the New York Yankees of water polo, and he spoke with The Wall Street Journal before the World Cup final to share his thoughts about the latest miraculous Croatian run.