Drug dealer shot dead outside same Bronx building where he killed two women in 2004: sources
His killer pumped three rounds into the driver’s-side window of Watkins’ GMC SUV, hitting him in the head, police sources said. Watkins died at St. Barnabas Hospital.
Police linked Watkins to a pair of killings inside the same building in 2004 that briefly spurred fears a serial killer was stalking the Bronx.
It turns out Watkins’ motive in the killings was likely much more mundane — at least one of the victims was killed over a drug debt, police sources said.
[More New York] Bronx man charged with misdemeanor assault in brawl that led to Alabama man’s death »
On Jan. 22, 2004, cops found the strangled body of Jeanine Faulmino, a 34-year-old homeless prostitute, naked except for a pair of white socks, curled into the fetal position in a staircase of the apartment building.
Seven months later — Aug. 9, 2004 — police found a second prostitute strangled outside a second-floor stairwell of the same building. The death of Diana Almestica, 32, rattled residents of the 21-story building, and several women told the Daily News at the time they feared a serial killer was on the prowl.
Later that month, police arrested Watkins and two other suspects. Police believed Almestica owed money to one of the suspects for drugs.
[More New York] Slain SI teen’s actions aside, “nobody should have to lose their life," family says »
Cops linked Watkins to Faulmino’s slaying in 2005, and charged him with murder, police sources said.
In 2009, Watkins was sentenced to six years for attempted manslaughter for both slayings — though he had already served more than four years behind bars as the case progressed, court records show.
Watkins, whose history of drug dealing dates back to 1999, was busted again in 2012 on federal crack dealing charges. He was sentenced to another 3½ years in prison.
[More New York] NYPD deploys new technology to keep drones away from Gay Pride Parade »
In a letter to his sentencing judge, he said he dealt drugs so he could afford Christmas presents for his daughter and son.
“It was the one thing I could do that would screw everything up. And it did,” he wrote. “Now I'm back in prison, doing the last thing in the world I wanted to do — hurting my kids by being absent, not being able to be there for them at all.”
Watkins was arrested again in August, after police said he menaced his mother-in-law with a gun outside the same building in the Murphy Consolidation Houses. He was released on $1 cash bail Dec. 12, court records show.
[More New York] 'His son was his entire world’: Man shot to death in Harlem had just dropped 7-year-old off for basketball practice »
Cops are trying to determine if his killing Monday night is related to Faulmino’s and Almestica’s deaths, sources said.
Watkins’ family gathered Monday night in his apartment on West Farms Square Plaza, across the street from where he was killed.
“Our family has had a tragedy. We’re grieving right now,” said a relative, who wouldn’t give his name.
A family friend said Watkins’ daughter is in her 20s. “I feel bad for his daughter,” the friend said.