President Trump's trip to Asia highlights daughter Ivanka's prominent role
"This seemed to be a moment where she came even further from the margins to center stage," said former White House staffer Peter Feaver.
During the president's trip to Japan and South Korea, one senior adviser took center stage in photos and on social media — Donald Trump's daughter Ivanka.
At critical meetings and throughout the president’s travels in Asia, Ivanka Trump, was there supporting her father, his agenda and her own women’s empowerment project.
On Sunday, the senior adviser to the president was in the room with her father at one point during his meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, captured and highlighted in footage aired by North Korean state TV.
On her own Instagram account, she shared photos entering and leaving one of the blue huts straddling the border between the two Koreas. Asked by a reporter about her trip to the North, she replied, "Surreal."
Her involvement at the G-20 summit that preceded the trip to the Koreas went viral when the French president’s office released a video of her speaking with French President Emmanuel Macron, the prime ministers of the U.K. and Canada, and the head of the International Monetary Fund Christine Lagarde. Her appearances quickly became a talking point in hyper partisan discussion in Washington thousands of miles away.
Lawmaker Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y. responded to the video on Twitter, saying that “being someone’s daughter actually isn’t a career qualification.”
“The U.S. needs our president working the G-20. Bringing a qualified diplomat couldn’t hurt either,” she added.
But it is not as clear cut as all that, according to former White House staffer Peter Feaver.
As an adviser to the president, Ivanka Trump has not needed to be confirmed by Congress — a role that is unusual but not unprecedented, he said. President John F. Kennedy appointed his brother, Robert Kennedy, as attorney general in the early 1960s.
"This seemed to be a moment where she came even further from the margins to center stage," said Feaver, who served under President Bill Clinton as director for defense policy and arms control, and as a special adviser on the National Security Council under President George W. Bush.
This more visible role could be a harbinger to a more formal role if Trump is elected to a second term, one that could require a confirmation from Congress, he said.
"If you're thinking about it in those terms, the more of a public record you can build up of you doing important things responsibly, the better the confirmation hearings would go," Feaver added.
Prior to her father taking office, Ivanka Trump ran her own lifestyle brand and appeared in his television show, “The Apprentice.”
Her lack of formal diplomatic experience fueled a trending hashtag #unwantedIvanka on Twitter and memes with her image inserted into famous historic moments, including the Beatles crossing Abbey Road and the painting “American Gothic.”
Former White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders struck out at critics of Ivanka Trump.

