'We use plastic without a thought'
The Top 10 Best Antivirus Providers For Mac (2018)
Are you looking for antivirus software for your Apple computer but don’t know who to trust? Or are you unsure if your antivirus is the right choice? These days, having trusted antivirus software is an important part of life. With recent media concerns over personal data security, and numerous harmful viruses effecting thousands of computer owners worldwide, it’s important you choose the right provider. There is no need to worry, our Mac specialist team have reviewed the most popular providers and ranked the most trusted 1-10. Our goal is to make sure your computer, and personal data are kept safe!
Most commonly asked questions about Antivirus
Are you unsure where to start with antivirus? Don’t worry, we’ve spent days and weeks testing all providers, so that you don’t have to. Here we’ve compiled answers to some of the most commonly asked questions about antivirus products.
1 What are the best antivirus products?
There are so many antivirus providers in the market that specialise in many different things, so it’s hard to say which is perfect for you. Most of the Antivirus products use the same technology for locating and removing viruses, so any of the brands listed here will offer top of the table protection. We always recommend looking for a product that is built to remove Viruses, Malware, Adware and Ransomware as many only specialise in one. We also don’t recommend spending a lot on Antivirus, products like TotalAV include the same level of protection as any other antivirus for a fraction of the price.
2 What are the most important features of an Antivirus?
All the main features are important as they work together to keep your system safe from cyber-criminals. At least, you should ensure we use a product that includes a real-time virus scanner, firewall, adware protection, safe-browsing security - these should keep you protected all-around. Click Here to use our side-by-side comparison tool to check that your chosen antivirus includes all of these main features.
3 Does antivirus protect me from identity theft?
This has become one of the most commonly growing questions in the past few months, as identity theft gets named the fastest growing global crime affecting 2 in 5 people. Whilst Antivirus does protect you from the cyber-attacks that can steal your personal data, it does not monitor your identity or help if your identity is compromised. Some providers have partnered with the credit-bureaus to provide identity protection services to their customers, for example this had a major influence on TotalAV’s #1 ranking, they provide full identity protection and credit monitoring to their premium customers.