Nets new draft pick Nic Claxton gets good vibes in Brooklyn
Of Nic Claxton’s 11 predraft workouts, only two felt good, felt genuine.
One took place in Brooklyn.
“There was no draft promise but you get that feeling they like you,” Claxton’s father, Charles, said. “Of course he goes to different workouts and goes through the motions.
“But he felt a little something for Brooklyn.”
On Monday at that same training center in Industry City, Nets GM Sean Marks introduced Claxton as the team’s 31st overall pick, a slim and athletic 6-11 power forward who fits the team’s philosophy of speed over strength. With family roots in the south and the Virgin Islands, NYC was a little bit daunting for the Claxton family.
But the 20-year-old will have no choice but to adjust.
“It’s very, very, different. But it’s a good different,” Claxton’s father said. “We took the subway yesterday. Went the wrong way and all that stuff.... But it’s fun. It’s an adjustment, coming from Georgia, South Carolina, and now Brooklyn. But he’s going to adjust.”
Coincidentally, the second-round pick that became Claxton once belonged to the Knicks. But it was traded in 2014 so that Phil Jackson could shed salary and have another roster spot for Travis Wear. Marks acquired it from Philadelphia for Trevor Booker in 2017, and the final result was introduced to the media.
Claxton leaped into NBA consideration after averaging 13 points and 8.6 boards as a sophomore at the University of Georgia, where he merely a bench role player as a freshman. A coaching change from Mark Fox to Tom Crean and a growth spurt catapulted Claxton’s career.
“The main thing, to be honest with you, was the coaching change. Coach (Tom) Crean came in there that spring, and he just changed everything, the whole system,” said Claxton, whose father was also a second-round draft pick in 1994 and played one season with the Celtics. “From the first press conference, he said, ‘Nic is a guy we’re looking to have here at Georgia.’ He had a vision for me. He told me the ways he would use me. That was the biggest thing.
"We worked extremely hard in the summer and in the preseason. Everything worked itself out. I have to give a lot of credit to the coaching staff, just coach Crean coming in and really just changing my life.”
Claxton can handle the ball and has the tools to develop a 3-pointer, but he doesn’t solve Brooklyn’s glaring deficiency in strength. They were pounded in the playoffs by Joel Embiid and the Sixers’ physicality, with the lanky Jarrett Allen serving as the defensive anchor.
Claxton, who has roughly the same build as Allen, said he weighs about 215 pounds and is confident about guarding the paint.
“I have a lot of heart. I always play with a chip on my shoulder with whoever I’m going against,” he said. “I’m giving my all whether it’s Joel Embiid or anyone I’m playing against. I’ll just contribute in any positive way. Only time will tell. We’ll see.”
More realistically, the Nets will find their Embiid equalizer in free agency. According to the New York Times, Brooklyn is exploring the possibility of signing DeAndre Jordan, a move that would serve two purposes:
Provide the Nets with the strong center they need.
Provide Kevin Durant with another reason to sign in Brooklyn.
Jordan and Durant are good friends. The biggest issue with signing Jordan is the money. If they sign Durant and Kyrie Irving to max deals as they hope, the Nets will only have the $4.8 million room exception to work with. “I think adding size is certainly something we’ll look at as the summer transpires, but you never know what happens,” Marks said Monday. Regardless of what happens with free agency, Marks has added two prospects in Claxton and UCLA guard Jaylen Hands (drafted 56th overall). Both will play in Summer League next month with no expectations beyond that.
“I’d hate to pigeonhole one of these guys into, ‘Hey, this is gonna be his path.’ I think we’ve run into some problems with that in the past, if we’ve said, ‘He’s going to play in the G League,’ or, ‘He’s going to do this or he’s going to do that,’’” Marks said. “When all of a sudden we get a guy like for instance take (second-round pick Rodions Kurucs) last year, he rose to the occasion. I never want to limit any of the guys we have in here. Through our scouting them, seeing them live, watching them on tape, getting to meet them, interview both these guys, these young gentlemen, I think they fit with what we’re trying to do here, what we’re trying to build here.”