McKayla Maroney prepared to go to trial against USA Gymnastics; hopes to effect change in sport marred by sex abuse scandal 
American gymnastics star McKayla Maroney was completely broken.

After suffering what Maroney claims was years-long sexual abuse at the hands of former USA Gymnastics (USAG) team physician Dr. Larry Nassar – "It started when I was 13 years old," Maroney posted on her Facebook page last October – the 2012 London Olympics gold medal-winning gymnast signed a confidential settlement in December 2016 with USAG, the sport's national governing body.

"In light of her worsening condition, and desperate need for psychological intervention, the Plaintiff McKayla Maroney entered into this agreement to obtain funds necessary to pay for lifesaving psychological treatment and care," reads part of the explosive civil lawsuit Maroney filed against USAG, Nassar, Michigan State University, the U.S. Olympic Committee and 500 other individual anonymous defendants last month in Los Angeles County Superior Court.

Maroney's attorneys allege in the lawsuit that the now 22-year-old former Olympian was "forced" to sign the confidential agreement, and that USAG did so to buy Maroney's silence and keep her from going public with the allegations about Nassar.

"The reason is (USA Gymnastics) wanted to keep it quiet," says one of Maroney's lawyers, Vince Finaldi. "They knew that (Maroney) was probably one of the most powerful voices that can blow this whole thing up, and how prominent a figure she was in gymnastics. They basically tried to gag her."

Dozens of women have come forward accusing Nassar of sexual abuse, including Maroney's 2012 Olympic teammate, Aly Raisman. Nassar was already sentenced last month to 60 years in federal prison after pleading guilty to child pornography charges. Nassar, 54, also pleaded guilty in November in Michigan state court to seven counts of first-degree criminal sexual conduct, and he will be sentenced this month on those charges.

After Maroney went public with her claims about Nassar on social media, she filed the lawsuit two months later. The lawsuit describes in detail the alleged sexual abuse Nassar inflicted upon Maroney for years, and how Nassar allegedly molested Maroney before her medal-winning performances in 2012 at the London Olympics. But despite disclosing her ordeal and accusing Nassar of the serial abuse on Facebook, Maroney was within her rights to go public with the claims, says Finaldi.

McKayla Maroney (middle) was part of the gold-medal winning U.S. squad at the 2012 Summer Olympics.
McKayla Maroney (middle) was part of the gold-medal winning U.S. squad at the 2012 Summer Olympics. (Gregory Bull/AP)
USAG, according to Maroney's lawsuit, was in violation of California law, specifically Section 1002 of the California Code of Civil Procedure.

"If the underlying circumstances of an offense constitute a felony child sexual event, then confidential settlement agreements are void as a matter of law. The legislature spoke very clearly to this issue. You can write whatever you want into a settlement, but if it's against statute that's right on point, then that provision is void as a matter of law, and unenforceable," says Finaldi.

Noted civil rights attorney Glora Allred represented Maroney when she signed the confidential settlement, and noted attorney Margaret Holm was USAG's counsel at the time. But it's unclear why neither Allred nor Holm/USAG went forward with a confidential arrangement when it was in violation of California law. Maroney reportedly received $1.25 million in the settlement.