
How I made the Bondi-to-Manly hyperlapse
I walked 80km around Sydney Harbour in the middle of a heatwave ... and filmed the entire thing 

David Fanner


Thu 13 Jun 2019 22.56BST


Last modified on Fri 14 Jun 2019 01.20BST


What is the Bondi-to-Manly?
The Bondi-to-Manly is a new 80km coastal walk that links two of Australias favourite beaches and takes in Sydneys iconic landmarks. About 60km of it is on public land, with the rest on suburban footpaths.
Finding your way is easy  cross two bridges and keep the ocean on your right and you should eventually make it to Manly. You can pack a lunch or eat at any of the fine cafes and restaurants along the way. And be sure to wear sunscreen.
What is a hyperlapse?
A hyperlapse is a timelapse but with the added element of motion.
OK, so what is a timelapse?
Timelapse is a photographic technique by which the capture rate of a sequence of frames is much slower than the speed in which they are played back. Basically, youre manipulating time to show  in only a few seconds  events that may take several minutes, days or even weeks.
Adding movement to the camera is the next step in the process, turning a stationary timelapse into the aforementioned hyperlapse. Now we are not only speeding up time, were also changing the point of view. This makes for a more dynamic and interesting shot.
Got it. How did you make this  hyperlapse?
The hyperlapse is part of a larger project that profiles the Bondi-to-Manly hike and it was created out of necessity. Because I was filming the entire 80km in a single shot as a piece of interactive slow TV, I wouldnt be able to stop and set up nice-looking shots to make a promo video.
The answer to the problem of not being about to stop lay at the bleeding edge of (budget) camera technology  I decided to take a 360 camera with me.
Traditionally you view 360 footage with a pair of goggles but, by using a process known as overcapture, its possible to pull a stabilised shot from the footage in post-production.
Its quite a revolutionary concept when you think about it, especially for newsrooms  imagine being able to send a reporter to an unpredictable event like a protest or a war zone with one of these cameras. Simply by pressing record, they would be able to capture every bit of action within view. 
But enough about this (before I talk myself out of a job) 
My plan was to film the entire walk using a small gimbal for the slow TV interactive, and then also shoot the highlights with a 360 camera mounted on a pole sticking out of my backpack.
A pole sticking out of your backpack? You must have looked ridiculous.
pic.twitter.com/HAcKR386rU
This is true. Holding a tiny camera out in front of me for hours on end, with another tiny camera stuck on a pole sprouting from my backpack  I looked like a budget version of Google Maps Street View. I got a lot of funny looks but greeted everyone I came across with a smile and gday and I didnt have any problems.
Looks great, was it fun to make?
Yes and no.
Yes, in that I still cant believe I managed to convince the news desk to let me go hiking for four days on the company dollar. I did set 