Nashville-based country stars love to play tourist at home
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) — Tourism comes alive in the Music City during summer, but the thousands who flock here aren’t the only sightseers in town.

Many Nashville-based stars enjoy playing tourist, too.

“I’ve been to the Country Music Hall of Fame a few times and ... you always learn something new,” Russell Dickerson told The Associated Press. “You can’t take in all that information at one time going, but like seeing some of Elvis’s old Cadillacs, like are you kidding me? It’s crazy.”

He doesn’t mind the attention from fans while he’s out visiting Nashville landmarks.

“Everybody is super nice and we just take a little picture, say ‘What’s up?’ and it’s all good,” said Dickerson.


Hunter Hayes said in an AP interview that he constantly goes to concerts in Nashville when he’s not on the road.

“I realize that I’m here all the time, which is hilarious,” he said. “But I just. Yeah I love the energy of the city. I think we all do. You know once we moved here, I was like ‘Oh my gosh, it’s so crowded’ and then we realized but there’s a lot of cool things happening.”

Morgan Evans and his wife, Kelsea Ballerini, have been rediscovering the city by foot lately and enjoying the sights downtown.

“It’s like one of our new favorite things to do since it started warming up,” Evans said. “After dinner we’ll just go for a walk around town and it’s so cool. You know, like a weeknight, you walk around and it’s a good reminder that you get to. . like we get to live here. Music City. You know, Broadway is right there and the Ryman Auditorium is right there and the Hall of Fame is right there. And yeah, I mean we love living in Nashville so much, so that’s kind of our new thing.”

Tourism comes alive in the summer, but the thousands who flock to the city aren’t the only sightseers in town. Many Nashville-based country stars enjoy playing tourist too. (June 21)
Sometimes, though, it’s just good to be home.

Tyler Rich said he doesn’t get out much when he’s in Nashville but likes to do touristy things in other cities when he’s on the road.

“I have a weird thing where I like to go to zoos,” Rich said. “I love zoos. I like to go and just hang out and see all the animals. And any type of history. I like museums and I’m a dork. But it’s cool.”