Amed Rosario’s new-look swing starting to pay dividends
Amed Rosario will never know how he might have fared against Max Scherzer on Thursday night, or how it might have affected him, but manager Mickey Callaway said he was looking out for the young Mets shortstop by benching him against the Nationals ace.

One night later, Rosario got back to crushing the ball.

The 22-year-old went 2-for-4, drilling a triple and a double to straightaway center field to aid the Mets’ 4-2 win over the Nationals on Friday at Citi Field.

Over his past six games, Rosario is 8-for-18 with three doubles, three triples and four runs scored.

“I’m feeling more confident at home plate,” Rosario said. “I’m feeling much better with the mechanics and the confidence, too.”

Rosario got his night started by belting a triple to the wall in center field and came home to score on Noah Syndergaard’s single that made it a 4-0 Mets lead in the second inning. Later, in the sixth inning, he ripped a ground-rule double past Bryce Harper in center that might have gone for another triple had it not bounced over the wall.

Callaway said the encouraging results are a byproduct of the work Rosario has been putting in since the offseason, but especially of late.


The Mets gave Rosario a mental break from June 24-26, taking him out of the starting lineup for three straight games to let him work on his swing behind the scenes. The focus was on having him sit back on his legs in the box and get more upright so he wasn’t leaning over to chase pitches that were down and away.

“My swing is much better right now,” Rosario said.

Callaway credited hitting coach Pat Roessler for the work he has done with Rosario.

“We’re elated that the byproduct of all the hard work is starting to show,” said Callaway, who wanted Rosario to get more work in Thursday instead of making him test those adjustments against Scherzer. “He’s such a good kid, he works so hard, he brings a lot of energy. … It’s been really fun to watch the last week and a half, two weeks.”

Rosario even stole a base Friday, taking third base for his sixth swipe of the season, another tool the Mets have said they want him to work on.

“I’m feeling good right now,” said Rosario, who seemed to be OK with sitting Thursday. “I’m working hard. I come to the field and put in my best effort.”