Australia set Bangladesh 382 to win: Cricket World Cup 2019  live!
Geoff Lemon (earlier), 
Mike Hytner (earlier) & 
Adam Collins (now)


Thu 20 Jun 2019 15.07BST



First published on Thu 20 Jun 2019 09.30BST




3.07pm BST
15:07


Adam Collins
Afternoon everyone. Bangladesh have to start this positively. They werent able to against England in Cardiff in pursuit of a similar target a couple of weeks back due to the way that Archer and Woakes opened up at them. They cant allow Starc and Cummins to do something similar. Instead, take the example of Sri Lanka, who were right on top in the power play on Saturday before throwing it away.
With this being the final game at Nottingham for the World Cup, the volunteers (Cricketeers) are doing a lap of honour. Nice touch. The Australians are warming up in front of us, Marcus Stoinis getting ready to bowl. But can he get through ten overs? asks Michael Clarke. If he cant, Australia will have a decision to make.
Just another thought, emails Damien McLean. The really frustrating thing is that run out risks taking oxygen away from the story of what was a fantastic innings for Khawaja. Great to see him back in some form, even if it ended badly.
Yep, I share that. He batted wonderfully. Nothing detracts from that. I wish that Maxwell had the chance to finish what he started, but therell be other days. 
As the players make their way to the middle, a reminder that you can chat with me throughout Bangladeshs chase in the usual ways: email or twitter. Can the Tigers pull off something ridiculous? Or will Australia move to top spot? Lets find out.


2.39pm BST
14:39


Geoff Lemon
Orders dont come much taller than that. They needed 387 to win against England a couple of weeks ago, and Shakib made a hundred that gave the impression he wanted to salvage net run rate. Then they needed 322 against the West Indies and Shakib made a hundred like hed never considered the possibility of not winning. Hell need another of the latter today if theyre to be any chance, but theyre unlikely to get bowling anywhere near as sloppy as the men in maroon dished up. 
David Warner, it seems strange to say, never seemed entirely in control as he has in the past. But he showed his ability, in finding a way to fight through a tricky start and then just keep going, maintaining his aggression en route to a large and fast hundred. He laid a massive base with Finch, Khawaja played his best innings coming in lower down the order, and Maxwell came in for a devastating salvo at the end that was cut short by Khawaja and a run out.
Bangladesh were dominated today. They lost the toss, had to bowl, and never threatened. They were forced by injury to bring Sabbir into the side, who dropped Warner on 10, and Rubel, who went for 83 off 9 overs without a wicket. Their opening batsman had to bail them out with the ball, taking 3 for 58. Nothing went right really. It will have to go astronomically well with the bat for this match to be anything but a foregone conclusion.
Adam will be back to take you through the chase, with occasional cameos from me as the day wears on. You can direct your emails to him from here on.
Updated
at 2.47pm BST



2.39pm 