Best-Selling PS4 Games On PSN In June
GTA V once again rules the top of PS4's charts.
Last updated by Jordan Ramée on July 11, 2018 at 4:41PM
With June well behind us, Sony has revealed the list of best-selling games on PSN for the month. The breakdown is divided into three lists: PlayStation 4, PS Vita, and PSVR, and Sony has also provided the most downloaded free-to-play games, PS4 themes, and PlayStation Classics.
The number one best-selling game for PS4 in June is Grand Theft Auto V, which comes as no surprise considering the title has been dominating sales charts since its release. It's followed by FIFA 18 and God of War, with the rest of the list mostly composed of popular multiplatform titles that released prior to 2018 or recent PS4 exclusives.
Two battle royales dominated the free-to-play download list: Fortnite and H1Z1, with the latter managing to take the top spot. Job Simulator was the best-selling PSVR game for the month, while Stardew Valley was the best-selling PS Vita title and Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas was the best-selling PS Classic. We've compiled all of the lists of the best-selling games and themes on PSN below.
June marks the halfway point for the year, and 2018 is already shaping up to be another incredible period for PlayStation. Plenty of 2018 exclusives are already beginning to dominate the PSN sales charts, like God of War and Detroit: Become Human. So far, this year has been a nice follow up to PlayStation's 2017.
If you're still looking for something to play on your PS4, check out our gallery of the best PS4 console exclusives. It lists every game that's released as a console exclusive for the PS4 that we've given a review score of 8/10 or higher. We've also compiled a list of the best cheap PS4 games if you want to save a little money.
Best-Selling PS4 Games On PSN
Grand Theft Auto V
FIFA 18
God of War
The Last of Us Remastered
Detroit: Become Human
Mortal Kombat XL
Jurassic World Evolution
Horizon Zero Dawn: Complete Edition
Minecraft: PlayStation 4 Edition
Gran Turismo Sport
Best-Selling PSVR Games On PSN
Job Simulator
Superhot VR
Driveclub VR
Rick and Morty: Virtual Rick-ality
Doom VR
Farpoint
Killing Floor Incursion
Until Dawn: Rush of Blood
PlayStation VR Worlds
Moss
Top Free-To-Play Games On PSN
H1Z1: Battle Royale
Fortnite: Battle Royale
Fallout Shelter
Brawlhalla
Paladins
Pro Evolution Soccer 2018 Lite
Warframe
DC Universe Online Free-to-Play
3on3 FreeStyle
American's Army: Proving Grounds
Best-Selling PS Vita Games On PSN
Stardew Valley
God of War: Collection PS Vita
Metal Gear Solid: HD Collection PS Vita
Bloodstained: Curse of the Moon
Odin Sphere Leifthrasir
Call of Duty: Black Ops Declassified
Minecraft: PlayStation Vita Edition
Persona 4 Golden
Jak and Daxter Collection
Personal 4: Dancing All Night
Best-Selling PS4 Themes On PSN
Cat of Apocalypse HiQ Dynamic
Legacy Dashboard
Mystic Tree Dynamic
Monster Hunter: World - Theme
Nebula Clouds Dynamic
Amazing Aquarium 3D HiQ Dynamic
Rainbow Shooting Cat Dynamic
Synthwave A/B Complete Dynamic Bundle
Awesome Space 4K Dynamic
Amazing Night Sky Timelapse Dynamic
Best-Selling PlayStation Classics On PSN
Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas
Destroy All Humans! 2
Psychonauts
Destroy All Humans!
Bully
Metal Slug Anthology
Grand Theft Auto: Vice City
The Warriors
Resident Evil 2
Tomb Raider