
My babys still learning to crawl. Must he really be taught British values?
I would rather my childminder ignored government advice and concentrated on teaching my seven-month-old son to eat solids


Wed 19 Jun 2019 14.40BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 08.44BST


As a recent migrant to this country, I got a shock when my husband and I looked for a childminder for our baby. The ones we met told us that alongside development goals such as eating solids and saying Mama and Dada, our child would be learning British values.
One had an official Ofsted-approved British values wheel displayed on her wall, next to educational posters designed to teach shapes and colours. The wheel had a picture of a doe-eyed child in the centre, with green arrows radiating from the child to the values, written on a yellow disc. I asked her about this baffling graphic and she rolled her eyes. Oh yes, she said ruefully. The British values. Got to have them.
This was the first Id heard of British values. At first I assumed this must be an old, proud British tradition  it seemed like the only plausible reason to teach them to all children, including babies, as well as to label the innocuous, mundane sentiments on the childminders laminated printout as specifically British. But then I found out that this idea is barely five years old. In June 2014, the then-education secretary, Michael Gove, introduced them as part of the governments response to the now discredited Trojan horse affair, in which Islamic extremists supposedly attempted to take over schools in Birmingham. The Trojan horse affair may have been a fake, but British values are apparently here to stay.
So what are these so-called British values? According to the government, they are: democracy, the rule of law, individual liberty and mutual respect and tolerance of those with different faiths and beliefs. These values were first laid out in the governments Prevent counter-extremism strategy in 2011, a set of guidelines intended ostensibly to prepare children for life in modern Britain. Schools and nurseries are now required to actively promote them, for example by: includ[ing] in suitable parts of the curriculum  as appropriate for the age of pupils  material on [] how democracy and the law works in Britain, in contrast to other forms of government in other countries. How to explain that in an age-appropriate way for my son, who is seven months old, was not made clear.
The childminders we spoke to cared for up to six children at a time by themselves, or with one assistant, in their homes. These homes were spotless and orderly, run with precision and grace. Many of these women were migrants and mothers themselves. It seems like a farce to pretend that they should be responsible for making sure my baby isnt being indoctrinated into extremist ideology or that he appreciates the rule of law.
But then British values were not added to his curriculum because child education experts thought they were appropriate, or educationally sound  they were added because of fears of religiously motivated violence. My son is still working on learning to crawl, and on eating foods that are any texture other than a puree. He also has a tendency to pull plates off tables, bang his head against the wall, and try to roll off the changing table. I dont want 