The best home gym
Regular exercise is essential if you want to stay healthy and fit, but it's not always easy to find time to get to the gym. With a home gym, you can squeeze in a workout whenever is convenient and never have to worry about feeling self-conscious about exercising in front of others. A home gym offers plenty of versatility, so you can do a variety of exercises from the comfort of your home. 
If you're not sure what to look for in a home gym, take a look at our helpful shopping guide, which is chock full of tips for choosing the best model. Our top pick is a professional-quality machine that allows you to exercise all the major muscle groups but is still suitable for individuals of all fitness levels. 
Considerations when choosing home gyms 
Multipurpose 
Versatility is the most important feature to look for in a home gym. You should choose a model that allows you to perform as many different exercises as possible so you can get a full body workout without leaving your home. That means you should be able to work out your chest, shoulders, back, arms, abdominals, and legs. Some home gyms offer as many as 75 different exercises for the most variety. 
While most home gyms are designed for strength training exercises, some models also offer a cardio component such as a rowing machine. 
Weights and resistance 
Another important feature to consider when choosing a home gym is how much weight it allows you to work out with and what resistance levels you prefer. Consider how much weight you're currently able to lift — opt for a model that can support additional weight so as your fitness level increases, your workouts can progress. Some home gyms can support up to 800 pounds, which is suitable for most users. 
Pay attention to whether the home gym includes the weights. Some models only provide the frame and bars, so you have to purchase the weights separately, which adds to the overall price of your home gym. 
Features 
Adjustability 
If more than one person in your household plans to use your home gym, it's important to choose a model that's adjustable. This allows people of different heights and body types to use the equipment without getting injured. 
Foldability 
Home gyms are usually large pieces of equipment that can take up quite a bit of space in your home. If you have a dedicated room to place your home gym, then it's not an issue. If space is limited in your house or apartment, opt for a model that folds. This makes it easier to stash the gym when you're not using it so you don't lose any valuable space. 
Wheels 
To make it easier to move your home gym around your house or apartment, some models feature wheels on the bottom of the frame. You can roll the gym from room to room as necessary without injuring yourself or damaging your floor. 
Home gym prices 
Home gym prices range in price from $300 to $3,000. A basic home gym that isn't quite as sturdy as professional-grade models and doesn't allow for as many exercises usually costs between $300 to $500. For a mid-range home gym that offers enough exercises for most casual and intermediate fitness fans, you pay between $500 and $1,000. For a high-end home gym that provides enough exercise for advanced fitness fans and offers many professional-grade features, you can expect to spend between $1,000 and $3,000. 