CLEVELAND – If frustration ruled the first two games of the NBA Finals for Cleveland, deflation and resignation might be the sentiment for the Cavaliers in the two games in Cleveland.

In Game 3 on Wednesday – and for the second times in the series – the Cavs had a chance to beat Golden State and failed.

The Warriors have too much and the Cavs not enough.

Or more to point: Even though Cleveland has LeBron James – and he did all he could once again – the Warriors have Kevin Durant, and that’s almost unfair alongside Steph Curry, Klay Thompson and Draymond Green.

James confirmed it in his own way.

“You guys asked me this last year, what was the difference between the Warriors the previous year and this year, and what was my answer? Kevin Durant was my answer,” James said. “He's one of the best players that I've ever played against that this league has ever seen. His ability to handle the ball, shoot the ball, make plays at his length, his size, his speed. So, there it is.”
Durant made the game look easy again, making 15 for 23 from the field and finishing with a game-high 43 points.

James fielded questions with the right answers following his triple-double (33 points, 11 assists and 10 rebounds). If the Cavs don’t have answers on the court, James has them off it. He knows the game as well as any player, and he understands what’s happening in this matchup.

“The margin of error is very low,” James said. “I mean, it's almost like playing the (New England) Patriots, you can't have mistakes. They're not going to beat themselves. So, when you're able to either force a miscue on them, you have to be able to capitalize and you have to be so in tuned and razor sharp and focused every single possession.

“You can't have miscommunication, you can't have flaws, you can't have ‘my faults’ or ‘my bads’ or things like that because they're going to make you pay. When they make you pay, it's a 3-0 or 6-0 or 9-0 run, and it comes in bunches. The room for error, you just can't have it.”

The Cavs have too many ‘my faults’ and ‘my bads.’

He might not admit it now, but James has seen this movie. It was a year ago when the Warriors took a 3-0 lead against the Cavs in the Finals and won the title in five games. This Cavs team, minus Kyrie Irving, is not as good as last season’s Cavs.

James won’t concede defeat, but he understands the difficulty.

“At the end of the day, if you want to compete for a championship or win a championship, you've got to go through the champion, and they're the champion,” James said. “Everyone gets so caught up on saying they're vulnerable or they're not playing so well, and then they go down 3-2, and then they go to somebody else's floor and win. Or they win at home and send it back to somebody else's floor and win in a Game 7.

“That's what championship teams do. That's what championship players do. They rise to the occasion, and that's what Golden State has done the last four years.”

James is averaging 37.7 points, 10.7 assists and nine rebounds and shooting 52.5% through three games of the Finals. He has had at least 25 points, eight rebounds and eight assists in his past 10 Finals games. No other player has done that in back-to-back Finals games, and he has done it 10 consecutive times. He is 3-7 in those games – all against the Warriors.

That's how great Golden State is. James is producing like few players ever have, and he might get swept.

“I can take you back kind of to the battles I had with the Spurs when I was in Miami,” James explained. “You just knew that they wouldn't beat themselves.

“When you have great basketball players but also that can also think the game and be very cerebral about the game, that's what adds to the level of stress, because you know that you can never, ever relax.

“And you should never want to relax. It's the Finals. It's the playoffs. That's what the part of competition is about. So, it adds to the level of stress… Because you know that you can never relax. You know if you relax, they make you pay, and making you pay could cost you a game.”

Against just about any other team in the league, James and the Cavs are up 2-1. Not against the Warriors.