
Trump's 2020 kick-off proves he lacks the self-awareness to change
The president is locked in the politics of nostalgia  and fails to recognize that fearmongering works best for candidates when theyre out of power



Thu 20 Jun 2019 11.00BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 11.01BST


Donald Trumps 2015 announcement speech is now remembered for his descent down the Trump Tower escalator, the hired claque of supporters and the wild accusation that Mexico was exporting rapists across the border.
With four years hindsight, never-Trump voters might look back at that speech with the same shudder of fear that horror movie fans have when a favorite character starts to go outside alone to check what that noise was.
But in the inner sanctums of Trump world, it is also possible to imagine that a presidential speechwriter could see in that 2015 speech the germ of a re-election campaign.
Promises delivered is one of the oldest tropes in politics. And if you squint, you can see how these 2015 lines might work for Trump today: Our country needs a truly great leader  that can bring back our jobs, can bring back our manufacturing, can bring back our military, can take care of our vets.
Another president  blessed with the buoyant economy that Barack Obama bequeathed to his successor  might have crafted a re-election campaign filled with sunny skies and beaming faces.
Maybe instead of Ronald Reagans 1984 Its morning in America, Trump might have claimed: Its morning in my America. Or the real estate huckster president could have concocted his own 21st-century version of Harold Macmillans Youve never had it so good.
But Trump, judging from his Orlando kick-off rally, lacks the flexibility and the self-awareness to ever change. Like the half-century-old Rolling Stone songs played at his rallies, Trump is locked into the politics of nostalgia. But what he misses is not some mythical Golden Age America, but the glorious freedom  with no constraints based on morals, truth, taste or the demands of state  of his own 2016 campaign.
With 23 Democrats running for president, why else would Trump reserve his bitterest invective for that rare public figure who is not in the race: Hillary Clinton? Trump must have reveled in the way that his fiercest Republican critics during the 2016 primaries have become spineless supplicants. In Orlando, he rewarded them with a brief moment of Trumpian favor as he described Senators Lindsey Graham and Marco Rubio as really brilliant, tough, wonderful friends who have helped me so much.
Other presidents campaigning for re-election have demonized their opponents, sometimes with a sharp edge.
Running for a second term, Franklin Roosevelt decried the reactionary business and financial leaders who opposed every part of the New Deal to battle the Depression. Never before in our history have these forces been so united against one candidate as they stand today, Roosevelt declared three days before the 1936 election. They are unanimous in their hate for me  and I welcome their hatred.
But no president, until Trump, has ever assailed his critics as not merely wrong or greedy but rather as un-American and unpatriotic. In one of the more vicious lines of his presidency, Trump snarled in Orlando: Our radical Democratic opponents are driven by hatred, prejudice and rage and want to destroy you  and they want to destroy our country as we know it.
In Trumps apocalyptic worldview, everything is 