Individual investors flock to booming China shares
 

 SHANGHAI  (Reuters) - Sitting on worn plastic chairs in a downtown Shanghai brokerage hall, more than a hundred people in their 50s and 60s trade rumors, stare at electronic boards displaying prices, or just get on with their knitting. 

 "I like to come here every day. I regard this as my new office," said Madame Zhou, who retired two years ago and has recently put 20,000 yuan ($2,545) in the stock market, roughly the annual disposable income of an average Shanghai resident. Zhou, who knits when no fast-rising stock takes her fancy, is part of a major shift in China's financial world -- the return of individual investors to the equity market. After deserting the market during a four-year slump that halved the benchmark Shanghai index  .SSEC , ordinary Chinese -- from retirees to office and factory workers, small businessmen and students -- are once again putting their savings into stocks. They are being lured by a strong market rally, aggressive advertising by an expanding fund management industry, and the government's decision in May to encourage China's top firms to list domestically instead of focusing on foreign bourses. Creating an "equity culture" in China has become an important part of economic policy. Officials publicly tout the market's prospects and praise reforms to boost corporate transparency and cut the influence of parasitic state shareholders on companies. More money in stocks helps wean firms off excessive reliance on bank loans, reducing risk in the financial sector. It is also helping to deflate a speculative property bubble in some cities such as Shanghai, as funds flow from real estate to equities. "People of my generation believe Chairman Mao's saying: listen to the Party. So I think now is a good time to buy," said Lao Zhu, who trades in a plush VIP room reserved for wealthy individual investors at Guotai Junan Securities. Zhu started investing in stocks several months ago, selling a house that he had been renting out and plowing 1 million yuan ($125,000) of the proceeds into equities. "I believe the government aims to help the stock market again, in the same way as it boosted the property market several years ago," he said. More than 2 million investors, almost all individuals, joined the equity market in the five months through the end of September, bringing the total to 76 million, the China Securities Regulatory Commission said. In the previous five-month period, the number of investors dropped by 861,800. October money supply data released on Monday showed individual savings deposits at banks fell by 7.6 billion yuan from the previous month. It was the first drop since June 2001, and analysts believe a major reason was that people were taking money out of banks to invest in stocks. A key event that boosted individuals' confidence was the smooth listing in Shanghai late last month of the country's biggest bank, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China ( 601398.SS )( 1398.HK ), which raised over $5 billion in the domestic market's largest-ever share offering. Company officials and advertising by mutual funds have successfully portrayed the domestic listings of ICBC and other blue chips as chances for ordinary Chinese to share in the profits of the country's economic miracle for the first time. The flood of individual investors' money, combined with fresh funds from local institutions and foreigners, has helped push the Shanghai index up 60 percent so far this year. The index, which ended on Tuesday at 1,888 points, now appears within striking distance of its record high of 2,245, hit in June 2001. That is next year's target for many individual investors. Analysts estimate individuals account for some 70 percent of daily turnover, which has doubled from levels early this year -- though the proportion has not grown significantly since institutions and foreign investors are also more active. Although growth in individual investment has been explosive, the experience of other countries suggests it may still have a long way to run in coming years. China's 76 million stock investors in September were only about 5 percent of the population. In the United States, over 40 percent of households own shares. Some analysts believe, however, that the road to a shareholding culture may not be a smooth one. Though they agree the stock market's regulatory framework is stronger and the number and quality of its blue chips greater than ever before, they note that the bull-run up to June 2001, which ended in tears after valuations rose too high, was also accompanied by government efforts to talk up the market. "There's a saying in the Chinese stock market: when even the old ladies selling newspapers outside the trading floor start to buy stocks, then it's the end of the bull run," said Zhang Qi, analyst at Haitong Securities.