The Technology 202: Amazon was the only tech giant called out on the debate stage
Amazon was the only technology company name-checked in last night’s debate, underscoring how the e-commerce giant is emerging as a bogeyman for 2020 Democratic presidential candidates eager to challenge corporate power.
Sen. Cory Booker (D-N.J.) called out the company -- as well as the party’s longtime target Halliburton -- for not paying corporate taxes after moderator Savannah Guthrie pressed him on whether he would single out companies like his rivals. Booker’s decision to lump the Seattle titan in with the global oil services company with deep ties to Dick Cheney underscores how Amazon’s political position has deteriorated on the left.
“I will single out companies like Halliburton or Amazon that pay nothing in taxes and our need to change that,” Booker said. (Amazon chief executive and founder Jeffrey P. Bezos owns The Washington Post).
Income inequality has emerged as one of the top issues for Democrats in 2020, and few examples illustrate the uneven playing field in the U.S. more aptly than profitable companies avoiding paying corporate taxes. Amazon emerged as the symbol of that issue after the company received a federal tax rebate of $129 million on income of $10.8 billion last year, according to a report compiled by the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy.
Amazon and Halliburton were among 60 Fortune 500 companies that did not pay income taxes last year, according to the same report. The companies on the list represented a diverse range of businesses, including airlines and car-makers. Other tech companies cited by the report include IBM, Netflix and Activision Blizzard.
Initially progressives like Sens. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) and Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) were leading the drumbeat on corporate taxes, but recently more moderate candidates like former vice president Joe Biden have also blasted the company on the issue.
Facing an onslaught of criticism, Amazon has had to adopt a new playbook, often responding to criticism from individual candidates and other prominent Democrats like Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-N.Y.) on Twitter. The company has not yet tweeted at Booker post-debate, but it did clap back at Biden recently when he levied a similar attack. Amazon said the candidate's issue was with the U.S. tax policy, not an individual company:
We’ve paid $2.6B in corporate taxes since 2016. We pay every penny we owe. Congress designed tax laws to encourage companies to reinvest in the American economy. We have. $200B in investments since 2011 & 300K US jobs. Assume VP Biden’s complaint is w/ the tax code, not Amazon. https://t.co/uPUv1Tzlma
— Amazon News (@amazonnews) June 13, 2019
Democrats aren’t just challenging Amazon on corporate tax issues. They’ve also slammed the company on its salaries for warehouse workers and Warren wants to break up the company.
The attacks on Amazon come as the Democratic Party’s relationship with the tech industry has rapidly grown icy. Tech companies have taken a beating during this primary -- in a sharp departure from the Obama era, when the industry was a key fundraising source for Democrats and many administration officials went on to take positions in Silicon Valley after leaving the White House.
Booker's Amazon name check was especially significant as he has raised significant sums from the tech industry and was a big early adopter of its platforms. The Stanford University graduate tried to persuade the company to move its second headquarters to Newark, N.J., after the company pulled its plans to move to New York last year. Booker was also among the candidates who received donations from former Obama press secretary Jay Carney, who now serves as vice president for worldwide corporate affairs at Amazon, according to a report by The Intercept. Carney also donated to Sen. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.), Beto O'Rourke and Mayor Pete Buttigieg. 
Silicon Valley issues overall got less air time than the NBC moderators’ hot microphone snafu. Other tech companies under immense political pressure, including Google and Facebook, were notably not mentioned by the candidates. When Booker was asked about whether he would break up Facebook, Google and Amazon, he did not directly address competition and pivoted toward corporate consolidation, attacking both the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries. He later stated his position on antitrust law. 
"And when it comes to antitrust law, what I will do is, number one, appoint judges that will enforce it, number two, have a DOJ and a Federal Trade Commission that will go through the processes necessary to check this kind of corporate concentration," Booker said. "At the end of the day, we have too much of a problem with corporate power growing."