The Metal Gear Movie Passes A Major Milestone
The script is in.
Last updated by Eddie Makuch on July 15, 2018 at 6:59PM
The Metal Gear movie has passed a significant milestone. Director Jordan Vogt-Roberts (Kong: Skull Island) said in a recent interview that the script for the film has now been sent in, which is a major development, though the film is still a long time away from happening.
Vogt-Roberts told IGN that the Metal Gear movie's script is going to blow your mind in a way that many things associated with Hideo Kojima do. "We just turned in the script, and I think it's one of the best scripts I've ever read," he said. "It's one of the coolest, weirdest, most Kojima things. If I wasn't involved in it, I would still look at that script and [say], 'Holy shit.'"
Jurassic World and Star Wars: Episode IX writer Derek Connolly was announced (via Variety) as the writer for the Metal Gear movie in November 2017. He and Vogt-Roberts have a history together, as Connolly co-wrote Kong: Skull Island, which Vogt-Roberts directed.
In August last year, Vogt-Roberts told GameSpot that the writing team behind the Metal Gear movie were re-working the script to make it more in line with what fans might expect.
"I was able to say [to producers at Sony], 'Let's really think about whether we're making the truest, most balls-to-the-wall Metal Gear version of this--the most Kojima version of this," he said. "And even if that means we make it for a little bit less money, let's make the version of this that's true to what it is, fully committed to what Kojima's voice is.'"
While the script for the film has now been turned it, that doesn't mean the movie will happen soon, if it is made at all. In the IGN interview, Vogt-Roberts said whether or not the movie ever gets made is still not a sure thing.
Video game movies have a history of being mediocre or worse. Vogt-Roberts is saying all the right things and is a big fan of the Metal Gear franchise, and he's working with Kojima. So all the pieces appear to be in place, but the movie still has a long road ahead.
The Metal Gear video game franchise celebrates its 31st anniversary this year. To celebrate, Vogt-Roberts is releasing concept art for the film on Twitter--see some of it here. You can also watch Vogt-Roberts talk to God of War director Cory Barlog in the video above.
Kojima left Konami in 2015 after the release of Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain. He started his own studio and is now working on the mysterious Death Stranding for PS4.