
Heathrows expansion plans make a mockery of the zero emissions strategy


Tue 18 Jun 2019 16.38BST


Last modified on Tue 18 Jun 2019 19.18BST


The bosses at Heathrow must have been visiting another planet last week, or else they missed the government memo about legislating for net zero emissions by 2050.
The plans unveiled today for a 50% expansion in the airport by 2050, including a third runway, all to be done in a sustainable way, take dissembling to new levels. Heathrow is already the largest single source of carbon emissions in the UK.
The outline plans reveal the scale of whats proposed: building a tunnel for the M25, rerouting rivers, building enormous carparks outside the perimeter of the current airport, destroying local villages. The government itself says nearly a million households will be affected by the third runway, which will allow another 700 flights a day.
The truth is that aviation growth and our expectation of cheap flights cannot continue
Heathrows owners maintain that the airports expansion will not significantly alter the UKs emissions, but only reach this conclusion by excluding international aviation emissions. That suggests they missed another memo, this time from the committee on climate change which has said emissions from international aviation should be formally included in the UKs climate targets.
Carbon pollution from flying in Europe has risen 26% in the past five years  far outpacing any other transport mode. And, while the UK economy has reduced its carbon emissions by 37% since 1990, CO2 from international aviation has increased by around 130%.
The governments own draft aviation strategy is a perfect example of its have-your-cake-and-eat-it approach. The condition attached to this strategy  provided that growth takes place in a sustainable way, with actions to mitigate the environmental impacts  is simply unachievable.
The IPCC has already warned us that we have only 11 years left to slash global emissions in half, if we are to achieve the Paris agreement goal of limiting global warming to 1.5C. There is no technological magic wand which is going to transform aviations dependence on fossil fuels in this time.
We are unlikely to see a single electric aircraft big enough to carry passengers any further than the distances easily reached by train until after 2050. And while new aircraft engines are certainly more efficient than the old ones they replace, the environmental benefit is more than wiped out by the expansion in the number of flights.
An official strategy which not only wants to build a third runway at Heathrow but also expand regional airports is not going to rein in airline emissions  which raises the question of whether the government is serious about reducing the UKs carbon emissions, let alone reaching net zero. And the plan to rely on international carbon offsets to balance the carbon books (as the legislation allows) is simply deceitful. Carbon offsetting will not deliver the net zero future that the science tells us we need to achieve, since all sectors in all countries will need to get as close as possible to zero emissions, and theres a limit to how much remaining CO2 we can hope to soak up with new forests.
The truth is that aviation growth and our expectation of cheap flights cannot continue. The draft aviation strategy is an opportunity to address this, starting with a commitment to ensuring aviation makes a fair contribution to actual reductions in UK 