Crunchyroll to Stream Wizard Barristers Supernatural Anime
posted on 2014-01-08 06:01 UTC-8 by Crystalyn Hodgkins
Kite/Galilei Donna's Umetsu directs series premiering on Sunday

Media distribution service Crunchyroll announced on Tuesday that it will stream the Wizard Barristers: Benmashi Cecil television anime series. 
Crunchyroll will stream the series on Sundays stating on January 12 at 1:00 p.m. EST for premium members in the United States, Canada, 
the United Kingdom, Ireland, South Africa, Australia New Zealand, Scandinavia, the Netherlands, Turkey, Latin America, Italy, Spain, Portugal, and the Middle East. 
Free users in those countries will be able to watch new episodes one week later.

The show takes place in Tokyo in 2018, where normal humans and those who can use magic coexist. 
As a result, there are laws against using magic, and a "magic courtroom" exists to preside over lawsuits regarding magic use. 
In these cases, "Benmashi" or wizard barristers defend those who use magic. 
The anime follows Cecil, the youngest Benmashi in history, and her associates as they defend clients in these cases.

Yasuomi Umetsu (Kite, Galilei Donna), who is credited as the show's original creator, is directing the series 
and handling the series composition at the studio ARMS (Elfen Lied, Kite, Queen's Blade: Rebellion). 
Michiko Itou (HENNEKO, il sole penetra le illusioni ~ Day Break Illusion) is writing the scripts. 
Tatsuya Tomaru and Katsumi Matsuda are serving as chief animation directors, and Kayo Konishi and Yukio Kondoo (MOKA?) are handling the music. 
Additionally, Rui Tanabe will perform the ending theme song "Blue Topaz."

The main cast includes:
Rui Tanabe (Kin-iro Mosaic) stars as 17-year-old Cecile Sudo, the youngest Benmashi in history who works at the Tokyo Ueno Butterfly Law Office
Kei Shindou (No. 6's Inukashi, IkkiTousen's Gentoku) will play 22-year-old Natsuna Hotaru, a cool rookie Benmashi
Hiroki Touchi (Mobile Suit Gundam 00's Lassee Aeon, Fairy Tail's Pantherlily) will play 27-year-old Mitsuhisa Hachiya, a courtroom terminator
Ayana Taketatsu (K-ON!'s Azusa, Sword Art Online's Suguha) will play 21-year-old Moyo Tento, a paralegal
Miho Arakawa (Penguindrum's Himari) will play 23-year-old Tsunomi Kabutohara, an associate and an airhead who does things at her own pace
Rumi Ookubo (Yuruyuri's Chinatsu, Galieli Donna's Kazuki) will play 24-year-old Koromo Sasori, an associate with a nice body who loves erotic jokes
Ayum iTsunematsu (Fate/Zero's Maiya, Hana-SakuIroha's Takako) will play 32-year-old Ageha Chono, a bossy woman who is a senior partner in the Butterfly Law Office
Wataru Takagi (Detective Conan's Genta, Hajime no Ippo's Masaru) will play 28-year-old Seseri Chono, an unexpected gentleman who is also a senior partner at the Butterfly Law Office
Junichi Suwabe (Bleach's Grimmjow, Fullmetal Alchemist's Greed) will play 25-year-old Kiba Sameoka, the senior partner of the rival Shark Knight law office
Marina Inoue (Haganai's Yozora, Minami-ke's Kana) will play 23-year-old Quinn Erari, a career police inspector in section 1 of the Metropolitan Police Department

Additionally, Chafurin will play Tobiro Kamakiri, Yui Taya will play batta Mitori, Daisuke Ono will play Shibuki Kujira, Rikiya Koyama will play Makusu Shimon, 
Yasuhiro will play Sango Sazanami, Hideshi Hara will play Sayachi Kajino, and Rie Miyoshi will play Megumi Sudo. 
Katsuyuki Konishi (Hyou-ka's Takeo, Kill la Kill's Tsumugu) and Norio Wakamoto (Code Geass' Charles Zi Britannia, Sengoku Basara's Oda Nobunaga) will also voice characters the series.

The series will premiere in Japan on January 12.
