From Thailand to Peru, foodies can learn to cook like the locals
#Travel
Bangkok (CNN) — Lucy Aitchison is thwacking a stalk of lemongrass with the side of a cleaver. A trainee surgeon from Sydney, Australia, she has grabbed the opportunity to attend a cooking class with a Thai chef while in Bangkok for a conference. "I don't have much time to cook at home," she says. "I was keen to do this class because you can learn much more from locals than by watching a TV cookery show or reading a cookbook."
The class started with the teacher, Chef Goong Sreesopon, handing Aitchison and the other participants a wicker basket and taking them to buy ingredients at a market, where the stalls are piled with a rainbow array of fresh fruit and vegetables and the seafood is so fresh, it's still swimming.
Sreesopon explained how to select the right piece of chicken for a particular dish (yellower skin indicates the meat is relatively tough, but highly-flavored) and choose the freshest eggs (pick the ones with rough-textured shells).
The attendees booked their lesson through Cookly, which calls itself the world's largest cooking class platform. The company, which offers more than 1,000 classes across 150 destinations in over 30 countries, was established in Bangkok in 2014. CEO Benjamin Ozsanay moved there from Berlin that year. "I was looking for adventure," he says, "and was attracted by the digital nomad lifestyle."
With a French mother and a Turkish father, Ozsanay grew up in a foodie family. The idea for his startup was sparked by a video of British food celebrity Jamie Oliver being taught to cook curry by a well-known chef in Bangkok. "I found out that she offered cooking classes, and tried to book one," says Ozsanay.
It sounds straightforward -- but it wasn't. "I filled out a form and waited. By the time I received a reply, I had left Bangkok to go traveling. I never got the chance to take the class," he says.
Cooking with gas
On arriving at Sreesopon's cookery school -- a converted house tucked away down a leafy alley in a residential area -- the class unpacked the shopping baskets and donned purple aprons.
The food is prepared "home-style" with everyone sitting in a circle on the floor.
The first item on the menu is tom yum soup. Sreesopon instructs the group to massage shredded coconut in warm water to make coconut milk, pound tamarind to a paste, bash lemongrass to release its tangy aroma, mash ginger, and chop straw mushrooms, tomatoes, spring onions, coriander and fiery purple bird's eye chilies. After this they head outside to simmer these ingredients in a row of mini woks along with tofu, shrimp and chicken.
An enthusiastic teacher, Sreesopon's face lights up when she talks about her job. "The students tell me they love going to the market to buy fresh ingredients. I get them to look after the money and pay for produce so they can learn the local prices."
After cooking -- and eating -- the soup, the class whips up a pad thai. Sreesopon explains how the fried noodle dish gets its complex flavors: "We add tamarind for sourness, fish sauce for saltiness, coconut sugar for sweetness and roasted chili powder for spice." The students also cook Massaman curry -- a popular dish from southern Thailand.