Zion Williamson picked No. 1, Hawks move up for De’Andre Hunter in trade-filled NBA draft

NEW YORK — The first three picks fell as expected, but everyone else went off script after that.

The New Orleans Pelicans made Zion Williamson the first pick of Thursday's NBA draft to the surprise of absolutely no one, officially installing the Duke freshman sensation as the heir apparent to departed franchise star Anthony Davis. Murray State's Ja Morant and Duke's RJ Barrett then went to the Memphis Grizzlies and New York Knicks, at No. 2 and No. 3 respectively, just as most mock drafts forecast.

From there, though, a flurry of trades shook up the lottery order and left the players and their families, assembled in a makeshift green room at Barclays Center in Brooklyn, checking their cellphones for minute-by-minute updates.

The Pelicans, owners of the Los Angeles Lakers' fourth pick thanks to the Davis trade, shipped it to the Atlanta Hawks, who selected Virginia forward De'Andre Hunter. In return, New Orleans added Texas center Jaxson Hayes at No. 8 and Virginia Tech guard Nickeil Alexander-Walker at No. 17.
Vanderbilt guard Darius Garland went to the Cleveland Cavaliers to finish out the top five. Then, the Phoenix Suns sent the sixth pick — Texas Tech's Jarrett Culver — to the Minnesota Timberwolves for the 11th pick and forward Dario Saric. In a separate draft day deal, the Suns moved forward T.J. Warren to the Indiana Pacers for cap relief.

Due to league rules, some of Thursday's trades might not be made official until as late as July 6, after the NBA's free agency moratorium is completed.

Despite the unpredictable turns, the night belonged to the 6-foot-7, 283-pound Williamson, who dressed to impress in a bright white suit. When Commissioner Adam Silver called his name, Williamson briefly bowed his head and hugged his mother and stepfather as the sold out arena greeted him with loud applause.
The highflying, wide-smiling 18-year-old warned reporters Wednesday that he might cry during his big moment, and he was briefly overcome with emotion as he conducted an interview with his mother, Sharonda Sampson.

"I don't think I can describe these feelings," Williamson said. "As a little kid you say you want to go to the NBA, and people say you've got to have a Plan B because the chances of doing it are little to none. For me to be selected No. 1, I can't dream it any better than that. I was able to make it onstage without a tear, but in the interview with my mom standing beside me, my emotions just took over."

Williamson said Sampson raised him in South Carolina with "tough love" and was "always the first one to keep it real with me."

"Whenever I needed something, she would do everything in her power to get it for me and my brothers," he added. "She put aside her dreams just so me and my brothers could have a chance at ours. I don't think a lot of people are fortunate enough to be in that kind of situation. I thank God I got a mother like I did."
Morant, an electric 6-3 guard who burst on to the NBA's radar with a breakthrough sophomore season, was welcomed to the Grizzlies by 2018 lottery pick Jaren Jackson Jr.

The two teenagers should eventually form a fearsome pick-and-roll combination in Memphis, where they will take the reins from guard Mike Conley and center Marc Gasol. After a run of seven straight postseason appearances together, the Grizzlies agreed to trade Conley to the Utah Jazz earlier this week after shipping Gasol to the Toronto Raptors at the deadline in February.

"Me and Jaren have been talking for a while," Morant said. "We had a strong relationship before the draft process started. I have some big shoes to fill in Mike Conley. He's a great player. I wish him the best. It just means the Grizzlies see a lot in me."

The loudest applause of the night went to Barrett, a 6-7 lefty wing who is the son of former Canadian pro Rowan Barrett and the godson of NBA legend Steve Nash. Barrett endeared himself to Knicks fans by expressing his desire to play in New York throughout the pre-draft process. The rambunctious crowd chanted "R-J! R-J!" throughout the night — a sharp contrast to the boos that rained down on Kristaps Porzingis four years ago.
