Blue Jays ace Marcus Stroman is basically begging to be traded to the Bronx
Marcus Stroman was out on the field early Monday to see his little brother’s baseball team. The Blue Jays ace is from Long Island and was close enough to make a visit home. Monday, however, he made it clear before heading out onto the Yankees Stadium field he’d be more than happy to call this place his home.

The outspoken right-hander doesn’t care about the pressure of the pinstripes or the scrutiny that comes with playing with the Yankees. He embraces it.

“I am built for this. I mean anybody can say whatever, but I am built for the big lights and the moment. I am not scared of it. I have never been,” Stroman said before Monday night’s Yankees series opener against the Blue Jays. “I’ll take that ball each and every time with the pressure on it. I love it.”

Stroman is not pitching in this series, but the Yankees, and other teams, had scouts at his start Sunday when he pitched six scoreless as the Blue Jays pulled out a win Red Sox. With starting pitching being the Yankees’ biggest weakness heading into next month’s trade deadline, they have had a scout at each of Stroman’s starts over the last month. Those scouts have been impressed.
He knows he is likely to be dealt by the Jays this summer, who will want to capitalize on his good season and avoid another arbitration year with him. He seems to relish being in that spot.

“I mean, my stuff is my stuff. You can judge my stuff. I know who I am as a competitor. I know who I am when the bright lights turn on. I don’t think start to start is going to be the difference in a team wanting me or not,” Stroman said. “I think my track record speaks for itself. I mean I compete. I get a lot of ground balls. I can get strikeouts when I need them. It is what it is.”

Stroman has struck out 77 over 100.2 innings pitched this season; he’s walked 30. The 28-year-old is pitching to a 3.04 ERA, 3.71 Fielding Independent Pitching (FIP) and 1.252 WHIP. He has given up just nine homers this season, for an impressive 0.8 home runs per nine innings pitched rate in a time when the ball is flying out of the park at record rates across the game.

And he’s a guy who is not only interested in pitching in New York, he’s practically begging for it.

“I love it. New York is like the mecca of the World, so I love excitement. I love bright lights, I love competition. I love pressure,” Stroman said. “So I have always loved pitching here. Even though I haven’t necessarily pitched well here, I’ve always enjoyed it. These Yankees lineups are brutals. They are hard to navigate.

“I love the spotlight. I have always loved it. The bigger moment, where I have always wanted to be.”

Stroman certainly hasn’t shied away from the spotlight or controversy. One of the more demonstrative pitchers in the game, he let out a roar Sunday when he recorded his final strikeout. He was criticized by Red Sox broadcaster Dennis Eckersley for his “tired act,” and Stroman did not back down.

“Boston is one of the best places to play. Just their fans. One of the most historic ballparks obviously. Going up against that lineup, a beautiful day, a Sunday, packed ... I was excited to pitch,” Stroman said. “That lineup one through nine is crazy. The fact I let out a little “Yeah!” at the end I don’t think is a sign of disrespect. I navigated that lineup, put up six shutties — it’s extremely difficult. And I work extremely hard to put myself in that position. It was more a fact that I am having fun and celebrating the moment.”

Sticking it to the Red Sox will only earn Stroman some more fans in the Bronx.

“If you look at everything individually, he’s not a great pitcher; but all those pitches are good, above average and you put that together with his mentality, he’s perfect for New York,” one National League scout said. “He is a tough competitor, he has a chip on his shoulder. You put him out there in a big game, he is going to be tough to beat. He’s a perfect fit for the Yankees.”