Liar and Stupid, second edition
by De Nhi Quoc Su, half-truth half-fictional news reporter

Recently, professor N. N. T, famous instructor of Fundament theorems of Marxism - Leninism, accused one of his student of lying. "I personally hate deceivers. My life as a soldier creates my current self. You [the accused one] shouldn't be class representative." said professor T - "YOUR TEACHER IS AS CLEAR AS THE MOON."

The reporter also reported, N. N. T had already accused him as "Stupid" not long before. Double kill on a single target, you may say.

What students feel
"I would be angry if I were him [the accused one]" - said student N.

"There was a great deal of tension in class. I was distracted by his yell and dropped my pencil." - reported student M on the scene - "Nice standard voice of the country, you may say."

"I was sleeping. I did nothing wrong. I blame the supernatural power that woke me up." - thought student A - "just another minute, and I felt like meeting Karl Marx on the spot."

"There is always only one truth." - said student D. The reporter cannot identify the meaning of his words.

"Why ask me? I'm not even in your f**king class!" - sweared stubborn K - "stop this or I'll call the police."

"I'm not even in your f**king school. Get out, betrayer." - yet another K.

But, what about The Accused One?
He was trying to save another student named N.N.A.K. According to the attendance, N.K had been absent three times, so he was in a dangerous zone. His essay would be judged severely. He would have to deal with a large risk of repeating a subject, which cost him much Ho te as known as vnd.

His friend knew this, and decided to save him. Unfortunately, he made a mistake, which led to the accusation of professor T. The reporter feels sorry for him.

"... someone, use his personal thought, to publicly label another one like that. Is that the right thing to do?" - thought student H.

One day, if you don't act, your friend will suffer.
Will you take the risk of being labeled in front of many people, to save him?
Are you ready being hated, to save your friend?
