She’s 10 years old and loves to skateboard. She could be an Olympian next year.

LONG BEACH, Calif. — Her hair pokes out of the back of her sky blue helmet and flaps like a cape as she flies around in circles. Poised confidently on her skateboard — knees slightly bent, infectious smile engaged — she gains speed and fearlessly attacks the bowl. Sky Brown is not here to take it easy, and she doesn’t have time to wait behind the older, bigger skateboarders.

She’s 10 years old, about the size of two skateboards stacked end to end and has a big mission on tap.

“I want to go to the Olympics,” she says. “I want to be the youngest one out there and show the girls it doesn’t matter how big you are or how small you are. You can do anything.”

Sky is a member of Great Britain’s national team, hoping to be among the world’s best athletes who gather in Tokyo next summer when skateboarding makes its Olympic debut at the 2020 Games. No one who has seen her on a skateboard would dare rule her out. Her outsize talent and charisma have made her one of the most popular and intriguing skateboarders — even if she’s just now wrapping up fifth grade.
She has several sponsors, a giant social media following and several viral videos to her credit. She’s a prodigy of sorts on a skateboard but also has made waves in surfing. Last year she even won “Dancing with the Stars: Juniors,” and she says there’s a purpose behind everything she does.

“If they watch me skate or do this trick, they’ll think maybe they can do it, too,” she says. “That’s why I want to do the Olympics — to inspire those kids who think they can’t do it."

Sky caused a stir when Great Britain put her on its national skateboarding team this spring, but she has since shown that she’s no novelty act. She took first in the U.K. national skateboarding championships in April. At last week’s Dew Tour stop in Long Beach, the first Olympic qualifier in the United States, Sky was the youngest skater in the field. She posted the highest score in the qualifying round of the park event and was third after the quarterfinals, though she failed to advance to the finals.
Sky commands attention whenever she’s on her board. She doesn’t generate the power of her competitors, who are often more than twice her age, but she can be every bit as aggressive, smiling almost the entire time.

“To be able to create the speed and get the height she’s getting with the weight she’s got — she’s like a feather — you almost think it’s impossible,” says Lucy Adams, the chair of Skateboard England and Skateboard GB.
Sky and her tightknit family — parents Stu and Mieko Brown and brother Ocean — split their time between Southern California and Japan, where Sky was born and first learned to skate.

“I started skateboarding when I was 3 or 4,” she explains, “but I’ve been playing with it since I was zero, kind of.

“It was always my favorite toy,” she continues. “I’d just always want to play with it.”
She would watch her dad and friends skate and then study YouTube videos. She wasn’t content to be simply balancing or slowly rolling. She hit the backyard ramp with her dad and was a natural, performing kick turns on the ramp and kick flips with her board.

Stu Brown uploaded some footage of 5-year-old Sky onto Facebook. The clip bounced around and soon amassed a few million views. Sponsors and event organizers started noticing. Invitations and opportunities started piling up.

She did her first local contest at 7 and the next year became the youngest girl to compete in the Vans U.S. Open Pro Series. The family is selective about what to take on and says it has had to turn down many opportunities.

The Browns spend at least half the year living in Miyazaki, a city in the southern part of Japan known for its surfing conditions but lacking in skate culture.