As Kevin Durant and Kyrie Irving head to Brooklyn, longtime Nets fans await the bandwagon

NEW YORK — On the Sunday late afternoon when the long-galloping coolness of the borough of Brooklyn took maybe its loudest stride yet, one of those honorably lonely sorts one might call an “ardent Nets fan” sat over in Manhattan on a bench in Central Park. He read his phone. He saw the news. He craved a rapturous scream but refrained.

He just had to get to Brooklyn before sundown for primo photo possibilities. He mounted his bike and made an hour-long meander south toward his home near the tip of Manhattan, a path complicated by the barricades of the gigantic LGBT pride parade downtown. He parked the bike and got a subway under the East River toward the tangle of train lines beneath the Brooklyn Nets’ home, the seven-year-old Barclays Center.

He emerged and found no other ardent Nets fans, the kind of classic Nets twist bound to change now that Kevin Durant and Kyrie Irving have chosen Brooklyn over Manhattan and all else. “Honestly, I thought a lot more people were going to be here,” said Jeff Liu, 31, who followed the Nets since they were the New Jersey Nets in his Garden State childhood. “I guess people haven’t really caught on or don’t care as much. And the Knicks have a bigger following. But next year there are going to be a lot more people.”
“Honestly,” he said, “I thought it would have been not just me.”

Soon a dude walked by, saw Liu’s Brooklyn jersey, high-fived him, exclaimed: “K.D., baby! Let’s go!” — then continued on.

“I have no idea who that is,” Liu said.

Squint down Atlantic or Flatbush, and one might imagine a bandwagon forming in the distance. All the entrenched basketball meanings in the city just went upturned. “If Brooklyn even comes up with something even close to a victory and wins this,” radio host Mike Francesa had said on Friday, “that would be such an amazing accomplishment and such a thundering blow to the Knicks.” The New York Post headlined it with the rare NOTHING BUT NETS with “Knicks nightmare” in the subhead, and the New York Daily News lampooned the Knicks’ “mecca” of Madison Square Garden with THE MECCA over a photo of — what? — Barclays Center.
That Barclays Center, above the convergence of the 2, 3, 4, 5, B, Q, D, N and R trains, and across the street from the kind of immaculate mall of chain giants that epitomizes Brooklyn gentrification, figures to change its NBA tenor. It figures to become a harbor of energy and star-shine, rather than a place people go to ply sane ticket prices into nightlong glimpses of visiting big-name players (such as the Golden State Warriors). And what might become of those sane ticket prices?

Roland Dumar and Junior Kelly, ages 39 and 38, wondered that after they crossed Flatbush Avenue on Sunday evening. In the crosswalk they had wondered about reasons Durant would have left Golden State and $221 million. Native Brooklynites who met at New Utrecht High, they had just gone to get Dumar a Nets cap but found the team store closed.
Yet Kelly wore both a Nets shirt and cap he had donned that morning, so a New York TV crew spotted it across Flatbush through the general desert of Nets gear in the area and hurried across seeking an interview. (He politely declined.) He and Dumar remember a Christmas tree lot on the Barclays land. They remember, of course, when Dumar’s brother ran the barber shop Skilz on the property, before the rent tripled.
