Cuomo says fate of law granting driver’s licenses to undocumented immigrants uncertain as county clerks vow to defy new statute
ALBANY — Gov. Cuomo is sure the state will face litigation over a new law allowing undocumented immigrants to obtain driver’s licenses — he just doesn’t know how it will turn out.
“Yeah, so there is going to be a lawsuit,” Cuomo told WAMC’s Alan Chartock on Thursday. “The question is, do we win or do we lose?”
The governor, who expressed last-minute fears that the federal government could use state-collected information for immigration enforcement, said the fate of the controversial measure rests with Attorney General Letitia James and Solicitor General Barbara Underwood.
“Their opinion is they can defend the law and they’ll be successful in court,” the governor said. “We’re going to find out because the court case will commence immediately.
“I hope they are right,” he added.
Steve Choi, the executive director of the New York Immigration Coalition, said the governor prediction coupled with his earlier concerns about the measure make it seem like Cuomo is less than enthused about the progressive plan.
“For someone who has repeatedly said he supports the Green Light NY bill, Governor Cuomo seems to be going out of his way to undermine it at every turn," said Steve Choi, the executive director of the New York Immigration Coalition. “We expect the governor to enforce the law that the Legislature passed and that he signed and for him to take action against those who don’t."
The law, which grants non-citizens the right to apply for IDs with a foreign passport and proof of residency in the state, was narrowly approved by the Democratic-led Senate and Assembly before Cuomo signed it into law.
Supporters say the statue will make more than 265,000 people eligible for licenses and improve road safety by making non-citizens who drive take road tests and get insurance and annual vehicle inspections.
But the plan’s prospects appeared to dim momentarily on Monday as the governor expressed last-minute fears that the federal government could use state-collected information for immigration enforcement and he asked Underwood to weigh in on the matter.
James responded with a statement publicly brushing off Cuomo’s concerns and calling the measure not only constitutional, but “well-crafted.”
 “The legislation is well-crafted and contains ample protections for those who apply for driver’s licenses," James said in a statement. "If this bill is enacted and challenged in court, we will vigorously defend it.”
Some upstate officials and county clerks have already vowed to fight and defy the new statute.
Monroe County Executive Cheryl Dinolfo told newyorkupstate.com she is already making plans to sue. The Republican will call on her county’s legislature to craft a bill allowing a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the plan.
Erie County Clerk Michael Kearns was one of many who said they will not enforce the law and told the Associated Press on Wednesday that he’s going to federal court with his own concerns ? that the law conflicts with federal policy.
Kearns said motor vehicle offices in the Buffalo area will not grant licenses to anyone in the country illegally and direct them to a state-run office in Syracuse.