Nissan Q2 operating profit dips

 TOKYO  (Reuters) - Nissan Motor Co. ( 7201.T ) posted a smaller-than-expected 4.9 percent drop in quarterly operating profit on Thursday as an aging product line hit global sales, and it kept its full-year forecasts, helped by a softer yen. 

 Nissan, 44 percent-owned by Renault SA ( RENA.PA ), is expected to be Japan's only leading auto maker to post lower second-quarter earnings. On Wednesday, rival Honda Motor Co. ( 7267.T ) said its operating profit jumped 19 percent as sales powered ahead in North America. Top-ranked Toyota Motor Corp. ( 7203.T ) reports its results on November 7. After straining to meet a 3.6 million vehicle global sales target for the 12 months through September 2005, Nissan has paid with a year-long sales slump, exacerbated by a paucity of new models. Its sole first-half launch was a commercial truck. July-September operating profit fell to 195.3 billion yen ($1.65 billion), beating an average estimate of 189.15 billion yen in a survey of five brokerages by Reuters Estimates. Net profit spiked up 31 percent to 164 billion yen, helped by gains from selling shares in Nissan Diesel Motor Co. 7210.T to Volvo AB ( VOLVb.ST ), as well as favorable pension and tax benefits. Revenue fell 0.9 percent to 2.32 trillion yen. A year ago, Chief Executive Carlos Ghosn predicted the effect of a final sprint toward the sales goal would be short-lived, but has since called for a reversal only in the current half-year, with Nissan planning to flood the global market with nine all-new models. "Nowhere in the foreseeable future will we have another low point in our product cycles such as we have experienced over the past 12 months," he told a news conference. "In the second half, and into 2007, you will see a return to the intense product launch activity that has fueled Nissan's profitable growth in the past." Nissan plans to launch 11 new products next business year, including a compact crossover called Rogue in the United States and the iconic GT-R sports car, to be sold globally. GHOSN DEFENDS RESULTS Still, some market watchers remain bearish, citing Nissan's sales slide in key regions. "It looks like the company is losing momentum," said Mitsushige Akino, chief fund manager at Ichiyoshi Investment Management. "Ghosn has pushed for reforms and Nissan has turned profitable. But the company now appears to be struggling in trying to move on to the next stage," he added. Responding to such skepticism, Ghosn, credited for saving Nissan from bankruptcy, defended Nissan's results and stressed that with its full-year forecasts intact, the auto maker was on its way to record a seventh straight year of record profits. He added that U.S. sales were on track to grow by a double-digit percentage in October. "Many auto makers would do anything to have 7.7 operating profit margin -- not at the low end of their product cycle, but even at the top of their product cycle," he said, referring to Nissan's margin for the April-September half year. "We are at 7.7 percent, very far from our potential. If that is the low end, you can imagine what the top is going to be." Nissan, which also makes the Infiniti line of premium cars, is predicting an operating profit of 880 billion yen and net profit of 523 billion yen for the year to end-March -- both up about 1 percent from 2005/06. The forecasts were set against an assumed dollar rate of 110 yen and euro rate of 135 yen. Nissan did not officially change its currency assumptions or its sales volume forecasts. Nissan's global output has fallen every month so far this year, and it risks being overtaken by Honda as Japan's second-biggest auto maker. Data this week showed Nissan's April-September output fell 11.9 percent to 1.52 million units, well behind Honda's 1.79 million units. Nissan shares gained 5.8 percent in July-September, slightly underperforming a 6.9 percent rise in the transport sector subindex .ITEQP.T. Ahead of the results, Nissan ended 0.9 percent higher at 1,389 yen, while the transport sub-index .ITEQP.T rose 1 percent. ($1=118.74 Yen) (Additional reporting by  Eriko Amaha )