Analysts sound note of caution on GM cash burn

 DETROIT  (Reuters) - General Motors Corp. ( GM.N ) Chief Executive Rick Wagoner has been riding high with Wall Street this year: GM stock is up almost 80 percent and talk of bankruptcy has receded after billions of dollars in cost cuts. 

 But analysts caution that the automaker's recovery is still stalled by one important measure: cash burn. "Weak cash flow outlook keeps us skeptical (a) turnaround is underway," Goldman Sachs analyst Robert Barry said on Thursday, a day after GM, which lost $10.6 billion in 2005, posted an operating profit at the high end of Wall Street expectations. Excluding one-time items, GM posted an operating profit of 93 cents per share, compared with an average Wall Street forecast of 45 cents per share. "GM's results tell a very different story if viewed from the income statement versus the cash flow statement," Barry said. GM burned $3.8 billion of cash in the third quarter, compared with $2.3 billion a year earlier. Chief Financial Officer Fritz Henderson said the bulk of the negative cash flow was due to a 72-hour sale on 2006 models that the  automaker offered over in late June and early July. Henderson, who said GM would not generate any cash through the remainder of the year, called reversing the automaker's cash burn an "important priority." GM shares, which touched a 52-week high the day before its results, have slipped 5 percent in the two days since with investor attention shifting to whether GM will succeed in moving beyond cost-cutting to drive sales gains. "GM's future stock price performance will be largely tied to its cash flow improvement," Calyon Securities analyst Joseph Amaturo said. Merrill Lynch cut its rating on GM shares to "sell" from "buy," becoming the fifth brokerage to lower its rating following GM's earnings report, as tracked by Reuters Estimates. Goldman's Barry said he expects GM's cash flow from automotive operations to be negative $5.5 billion in 2006, and negative $2.3 billion in 2007. GM's Henderson said that of the $6 billion savings on structural costs forecast for this year, only $2.5 billion would be cash. "We're still of the view that the best cost cutting news is behind GM," Bear Stearns analyst Peter Nesvold said. GM, which will save $1 billion in annual healthcare costs through a deal it reached with its union, is slashing more than 30,000 jobs. As part of its cost-cutting efforts, the automaker is also closing 12 plants. "Our sense is that as these issues fade into history or generate fewer headlines, the stock's floor could drift downward," Nesvold said.