KonoSuba – God's blessing on this wonderful world!! Anime Previewed in Ad
posted on 2015-12-29 12:57 UTC-8 by Egan Loo

The official website for the television anime of Natsume Akatsuki's 
KonoSuba – God’s blessing on this wonderful world!! (Kono Subarashii Sekai ni Shukufuku o!) 
light novels began streaming a commercial for the television broadcast on Monday. 
Like the earlier video, the ad previews Machico's opening theme song "fantastic dreamer."

The popular "alternate world home comedy" centers around Kazuma Sato, a hikikomori (shut-in) die-hard fan of games, 
anime, and manga. 
A traffic accident brings his disappointingly brief life to an end … 
or it should have, but he wakes up and sees a beautiful girl who introduces herself as a goddess. 
"Hey, I have some good news — would you like to go to an alternate world? You may only bring one thing you like with you."
He responds, "…So, I'll bring you." With that, he is transported to another world 
and his great adventure subjugating the demon king begins … 
but first the hard work of finding food, clothing, and shelter begins. 
Kazuma wants to live in peace, but the goddess raises one problem after another, 
and then the demon king's army has its eyes set on him.

The cast members for the television anime include:
Jun Fukushima as Kazuma, a game fan transported to an alternate world
Sora Amamiya as Aqua, the goddess who transports Kazuma to another world
Rie Takahashi as Megumin, the greatest mage even among her group of magic-user
Ai Kayano as Darkness, a powerful female knight with a sense of justice
Sayuri Hara as Luna, the guild's clerk
Tetsu Inada as a ruffian who always welcomes adventurers who visit the guild
Ayaka Suwa as Chris, a friend of Darkness
Hiroki Yasumoto as Dullahan, a leader of the demon king's army
Takuya Eguchi as Mitsurugi, a strikingly handsome adventurer with a sense of justice
Yui Horie as Wiz, the shopkeeper of a magical item shop
The cast is different from the cast of a drama CD that shipped on June 1.

Takaomi Kanasaki (Tokyo Ravens, Is This a Zombie?) is directing at Studio DEEN. 
Makoto Uezu (Is This a Zombie?, The Heroic Legend of Arslan, Yuki Yuna Is a Hero) is in charge of the series scripts, 
and Koichi Kikuta (animation director on episodes of Robotics;Notes, Haikyu!!) is designing the characters. 
Masato Koda (Arpeggio of Blue Steel, Maria the Virgin Witch) is composing the music.
Other staff members include:
Art Director: Masakazu Miyake
Color Key: Saori Yoshida
Director of Photography: Shigemitsu Hamao
Editing: Kashiko Kimura
Sound Director: Yoshikazu Iwanami
Sound Effects: Yasumasa Koyama
Recording: Takayuki Yamaguchi
Sound Production: HALF H·P STUDIO
Music Production: Nippon Columbia
Machico is performing the opening theme song "fantastic dreamer." The single CDs for both theme songs will ship on January 27.

The anime will premiere on January 13 on Tokyo MX and other channels.
In addition to the television anime, the light novel will get an original anime DVD (OAD) 
bundled with the limited edition 20th volume of Akatsuki's light novel series. 
Akatsuki will pen the episode's original story featuring the character Yunyun, 
who has not been revealed for the television anime.

Akatsuki launched the light novel series with illustrations by Kurone Mishima 
(The Devil is a Part-Timer! High School! manga) in 2013, 
and Kadokawa published the seventh volume on August 29. 
The light novels already inspired a Kono Subarashii Sekai ni Bakuen o! spinoff novel series, 
and Masahito Watari launched a manga adaptation of the original novels in Kadokawa's Monthly Dragon Age magazine last September.
