Birth of a hypothesis
The first formal description of the Younger Dryas impact hypothesis came in 2007, when four researchers sat in front of a gaggle of reporters at the American Geophysical Union’s spring meeting in Acapulco, Mexico. The researchers, including West, had taken a close look at about two dozen sites across North America showing a “boundary layer” of sediments dating to the onset of the Younger Dryas. Half a dozen of the sites also have thin layers of organic-rich sediments called “black mats” immediately overlying the boundary layer. Several of those sites show signs of occupation by the Clovis people.

A line in the clay

CAVE: R.B. FIRESTONE ET AL/PNAS 2007; SPEARPOINT: COURTESY OF VIRGINIA DEPT. OF HISTORIC RESOURCES
At Arizona’s Murray Springs, an organic clay layer, or black mat, dating to around 12,800 years ago, sits on top of deposits containing Clovis artifacts (spearpoint, right) and skeletons of large game. Some researchers say the layer holds markers of an extraterrestrial impact.
The mats apparently mark the line between occupation and absence at the Clovis sites: For example, a black mat at a site called Murray Springs, in Arizona, sits above a trove of Clovis artifacts, a fire pit and an almost fully articulated skeleton of an adult mammoth. But above the mat, there are no such artifacts; at Murray Springs and elsewhere, the fluted stone spearpoints made by the Clovis culture disappear from the archaeological record, leading to speculation that the people mysteriously and abruptly vanished.

Those Younger Dryas boundary layers, West and colleagues reported in 2007, contain a variety of intriguing items, including tiny round magnetized grains called microspherules, other magnetized grains of sediment, little spherules of carbon, hollow round carbon molecules called fullerenes and nanodiamonds. Chemical analyses also revealed spikes in iridium and nickel concentrations and in charcoal and soot.

Taken alone, these items may or may not be signs of an extraterrestrial impact: Microspherules, for instance, form when a material heats up and then rapidly cools. They can form during a volcanic eruption, from industrial pollution or as a result of an extraterrestrial impact.

But when taken together, such a suite of markers could point only to an extraterrestrial impact, the researchers concluded: Something struck Earth and exploded in its atmosphere at the onset of the Younger Dryas, about 12,800 years ago. The soot and charcoal suggested that the impact triggered widespread burning that blocked out the sun and brought about a thousand years of near-glacial temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere.

Because no impact crater dating to this time has been found, the researchers suggested that the impactor was probably already fragmented when it entered Earth’s atmosphere. Smaller fragments would have done plenty of damage as they exploded in the atmosphere over the retreating Laurentide Ice Sheet, but they wouldn’t have left much of a smoking hole in the ground.

The news made a splash — and scientists were intrigued (SN: 6/2/07, p. 339). The prospect of layers rich in impact markers found scattered across a continent was definitely worth investigating further. Mark Boslough, a physicist at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, says that initially, he took the data at face value. “I thought, ‘they’re on to something interesting.’ ”