Lewis Pugh to swim Channel to expose pollution
Lewis Pugh is swimming the length of the English Channel, from the Atlantic Ocean to the North Sea as part of a pollution campaign.
18:16



That is where we will leave it as the questions continue. 
:: Follow Sky News from Thursday 12 July for updates on Lewis Pugh's progress
:: Sky's Ocean Rescue campaign encourages people to reduce their single-use plastics. You can find out more about the campaign and how to get involved at www.skyoceanrescue.com






18:09



Gove absence
Lewis explains that Environment Secretary Michael Gove, who had been scheduled to attend the news conference, was unable to do so because "it is a very busy day" and for more on the day's fast-changing political development, go to our live updates.






18:02



Is the UK really an ocean leader?
"It is shocking that a country that portrays itself as an ocean leader has only protected seven percent of its oceans...We can do better and we must do better."





17:59



Breaking new ground
"Nobody has ever attempted to swim anywhere close to this distance before. There is nobody I can ask for advice from. I know that I'll see Dover but I don't know how," Lewis says.





17:49



Calories per day
Moving to questions, Lewis is asked how many calories he is likely to consume daily. He says that, by the end, he is hoping to be swimming for six hours a day and a nutrition expert has told him that he will need to be consuming 10,000 calories every 24 hours.





17:39



Protecting our generation
The endurance swimmer says what he is doing is "absolutely not about protecting future generations. It's about protecting or generation."





17:37



Arctic temperatures
Pointing to a map of the Arctic, Lewis says he swam the Arctic Ocean in 2005 when the temperature was 3 degrees. In 2017, he says, he returned and found the temperature was 10 degrees. 

17:16



"Long and cold"
Lewis tells the audience swimming the length of the Channel is very hard, as it is "long, cold and full of jellyfish."


17:00


After taking the stage, Lewis jokes about choosing the 12th of July (the day after England's World Cup semi-final) because he thought it would be a "quiet day". 




16:49


The challenge facing him is an extremely dangerous one, as 21 people have died attempting to cross the Channel, but he is swimming its 350-mile length, from Cornwall to Kent. 

16:46


Endurance swimmer and ocean conservation campaigner Lewis Pugh is meeting the media ahead of his English Channel swim.
16:30


Key points:


Lewis Pugh to swim 350 miles across English coast, from Cornwall to Kent

Swimmer will spend five hours in the English Channel every day for 50 days

The swim is part of the Action For Oceans campaign
'Why I'm swimming the length of the Channel'


