
The west thinks Putin is Russia's spymaster. But are the spies controlling him?
From Ukraine to the US, Russias risky policies may be a sign of the security services sway over the president


Thu 20 Jun 2019 11.40BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 12.38BST


Vladimir Putin will be hoping that the release of the Russian investigative journalist Ivan Golunov in response to an unprecedented campaign of public protest demonstrates his credentials as a a good tsar willing and able to shield his subjects from the excesses of the Russian security and police services. Golunov was arrested in a clumsy frame-up after his exposs of corruption among the Moscow elite made him too many enemies.
But most Russians understand all too well that such cases are a symptom of the degree to which Putin lets the intelligence services plunder and persecute at will. Once seen as his greatest allies, the shadowy siloviki  a distinctively Russian term for the men of force of the military, intelligence and security services  increasingly seem like Putins biggest problem. The annual St Petersburg International Economic Forum, held earlier this month and meant to showcase investment opportunities in Russia, was haunted by the spectre of the American businessman Michael Calvey,whose arrest earlier this year caused shockwaves in the international investment community. Calvey, one of a dwindling band of foreigners who remain committed to the Russian market, denies any wrongdoing and has been released, but is believed to have been charged after a complaint from a business rival to the Federal Security Service (FSB), the successor organisation of the KGB.
Meanwhile, a string of often ill-thought-through adventures, from the intervention in the Donbass in 2014, through interfering in the 2016 US elections, to the failed assassination attempt on Sergei Skripal in Britain in 2018, have left Russia under sanctions, Nato reunited, Europe rearming and the US with a Russia policy tougher now than at any point since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
From persecutions to adventurism, most of these developments do not originate with Putin, but elsewhere: in the security and intelligence community, and their friends, clients and partners in business and politics. The boss may sign off on their international shenanigans in particular, but it is worth wondering how far he lets himself be guided by them.
The most pernicious and pervasive of the myths the west believes about Putin is the Russian presidents persona as the consummate spook and spymaster. What is clear is that we seriously misunderstand Putins relationship with his own intelligence services. Rather than the master spy, he is rather a spook fanboy, too easily beguiled and bamboozled by his spymasters.
Arguably, he always has been. While still at school, he went to the regional headquarters of the Soviet KGB in Leningrad, as St Petersburg was still known then. This slab-sided building, known as Bolshoi Dom  the Big House  had an infamous reputation, having previously been the offices of Stalins secret police. Alleged enemies of the state had been executed in its blood-drenched basement rooms, but teenage Putin popped by for some career advice. A nonplussed KGB officer told him to go away and either do his military service or graduate from university first. And so he did: Putin went to Leningrad State University, graduated and joined the KGB. He would remain in the service for 17 years, a period that many feel shaped him. 