General Electric to End Its More Than 100-Year Run on the Dow Jones and Your iPhone Will Soon Send Your Exact Location to First Responders When You Call 911




General Electric GE kicked off 2013 with a large asset sale announcement, agreeing in February to sell its remaining stake in NBCUniversal’s joint venture with Comcast for $18.1 billion. Proceeds from that sale were used to accelerate both share buybacks and the conglomerate’s restructuring plans. In the year ahead, GE is looking to invest. In April, the company made an offer to to buy French firm Alstom’s power and grid businesses for nearly $17 billion — a deal that would, if approved, immediately boost GE’s earnings.
 
Bloomberg—Bloomberg via Getty Images
By ALEX VEIGA / AP 
June 19, 2018
(LOS ANGELES) — General Electric will be dropped from the Dow Jones industrial average next week, ending the industrial conglomerate’s more than 100-year run in the 30-company blue chip index.
S&P Dow Jones Indices said Tuesday that GE will be removed from index before the open of trading next Tuesday. Its slot will go to drugstore chain Walgreens Boots Alliance.
Boston-based GE was an original member of the Dow Jones industrials dating back to 1896. It had been a continuous member of the Dow since 1907.
GE has been struggling in recent years, shrinking dramatically since it became entangled in the financial crisis a decade ago.
The company is under investigation related to a $15 billion hit it took to cover miscalculations at an insurance unit.
Your iPhone Will Soon Send Your Exact Location to First Responders When You Call 911
By CIARA NUGENT 
June 18, 2018
iPhones will soon automatically share your location with first responders when you call 911, thanks to a new partnership between Apple and startup RapidSOS.
Under the new system, iPhones will send their exact location to a RapidSOS dispatcher, which will then forward the coordinates to local emergency response centers. That should make it easier for ambulances and paramedics to reach callers and shave precious minutes off response times, potentially saving 10,000 lives per year, according to federal regulator estimates.
The new feature will be packaged as part of iOS 12, an iPhone software update due later this year.
The existing 911 system was designed for a time when everyone used landlines and call operators could easily pinpoint phones’ locations. Now, though, more than 80% of 911 calls are made on cell phones in many parts of the country, according to the National Emergency Number Association. Cellphone carriers currently share location estimates with emergency dispatchers, but these can be off by as much as a few hundred yards.
Apple says the location data cannot be shared if 911 has not been called, and that RapidSOS’ data will be separate from that held by cellphone carriers.
RapidSOS is free for emergency response centers, but is currently used by less than half nationwide. The company expects this to increase to a majority of centers by the end of the year, according to The Wall Street Journal.


