
Fernando Alonso bows out unbeaten as Le Mans looks to the future
Spaniard joins an illustrious list but leaves endurance racing as organisers are eager to revitalise and level playing field

Giles Richards


Thu 20 Jun 2019 09.00BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 11.50BST


After victory on Sunday at the Le Mans 24 hours Fernando Alonso left the Circuit de la Sarthe having joined a very select club. With his win last year at the first attempt, the Spaniard, who is now leaving endurance racing, joins Woolf Barnato and Jean-Pierre Wimille as the only multiple Le Mans winners who remain unbeaten at the race.
Alonso leaves on a high, albeit an unexpected one after an unlikely win. Yet for many drivers, among them Britains Nick Tandy who won here in 2015, stepping away from Le Mans is almost unthinkable. Alonso may not be there for it but Tandy doubtless will be as the race looks to embrace a new future.
Alonso won alongside Sbastien Buemi and Kazuki Nakajima for Toyota, beating their sister No 7 car driven by Mike Conway, Kamui Kobayashi and Jos Mara Lpez into second. It was a two-horse race with Toyota, the only manufacturer in the top LMP1 hybrid class, and Alonsos squad did not have the better of it.
The No 7 had been on top for almost 23 hours, with a two-minute advantage when a tyre sensor indicated a front-right puncture. The crew brought the car in, changed the tyre only to find the sensor had been wrong and it was the left rear losing pressure. Another stop ensued and Lpez, who admitted he was in tears, lost the lead and the race.
Alonso had the good grace to say the win belonged to the sister car. It was a shocking race, he said. We didnt have the pace to win the race, the No7 car was quicker than us and we didnt deserve the victory maybe, but we were lucky.
He did note, however, that he felt he was due some positive racing karma. On other occasions it took us off some F1 championships and they are tough moments when you are on one side and happy moments when you are on the other side. The good luck was on our side but other races or F1 championships were gone inexplicably and we have to enjoy being on this side.
Quite whether Conway, Kobayashi and Lpez felt that the double F1 world champion deserved this particular piece of fortune seems unlikely. Their disbelief and disappointment was painful to behold.
Still, that Alonso is unbeaten is what the record books will show, a feat not achieved for some time. Britains Barnato, one of the Bentley Boys, won Le Mans three times between 1928 and 1930, while Frances Wimille won in 1937 and 1939 driving a Bugatti until the war intervened and he went on to serve in the Special Operations Executive against the Nazis.
Alonso, if he does not drive the 24 again, will stand alongside them for good but it is a shame that he is not sticking around for further attempts. Both his wins came when Toyota faced no manufacturer competition and were the class of the field.
This is changing, however. For the 2020-21 World Endurance Championship season and Le Mans, the ACO and the FIA, as organisers, announced last weekend that new Hypercar regulations would define the top class. It is designed 