It's complicated: Nikki Bella provides an update on her relationship with John Cena
It has been a full two weeks since the last relationship revelation between professional wrestlers Nikki Bella and John Cena, so their love story was due for a new and completely confounding update.
On Sunday, Bella posted a video to the YouTube channel she shares with twin sister and “Total Bellas” co-star Brie, providing fans with the latest in her narratively unsatisfying romantic saga.
“Right now, we’re just friends,” Bella said, clarifying her relationship status. “We are both working on each other, and trying to work on us. We talk every day. He is not only my best friend, but he truly is one of the most amazing people I have ever met. He has patience with me and he has really taught me a lot over the past few months. And I think one of those things is an inner strength that I thought I had, but I didn’t realize how strong I had it.”
For those individuals joining this slow-motion car crash already in progress, Cena and Bella began dating in 2012 and became engaged in April 2017 when the former World Heavyweight Champion proposed in the ring at Wrestlemania 33. 
A year later, the couple broke up just a month shy of their scheduled May wedding. Weeks later, Cena poured his heart out on “Today,” affirming that he still wanted to be with Bella. 
In the meantime, nearly an entire season of “Total Bellas” aired and the timeline grew even more confusing. 
In June, the couple was rumored to be back together and appeared to reconcile in an episode of the series two weeks ago. 
But apparently, all is not well in the wonderful world of wrestling.
“I don’t know. I do have hopes for us,” Bella admitted in the six-minute video. “And John right now is in China filming a movie and so I hate to say ‘perfect timing,’ but it’s giving us this time in life to see what we really want for the future.”
Bella went on to poo poo those in media who suggest that the reality show couple stalling for time is a bad thing. She says she wants to be married forever and takes the decision seriously.
“I truly want to walk down that aisle and I want to give my vows and I want this to be one time. So there’s a lot of issues I had to deal with and really know what I wanted for the rest of my life. I’m just beyond grateful that I have this amazing man who is staying by my side and helping me fight through those issues and helping me just become an even better person, even stronger,” she said.
“That’s where we’re at right now. … Hopefully one day we will get back together and if we don’t, we just both want each other to be very, very happy,” Bella concluded.
You heard it, folks. Definitely no change for this high-profile couple for the foreseeable future. 
Or at least until the “Total Bellas” Season 3 finale airs on Sunday.