
Antigua: sprawling 'Chinese colony' plan across marine reserve ignites opposition
Opponents warn construction of the Yida project, which includes a manufacturing hub, puts island at risk of hurricane damage

Gemma Handy in St John's


Thu 20 Jun 2019 09.00BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 12.38BST


Plans to construct a sprawling Chinese colony complete with factories, homes and holiday resorts across a pristine marine reserve in Antigua have ignited a storm of controversy on the Caribbean island.
Known locally as the Yida project after its main investor, Yida Zhang, the scheme includes plans for a manufacturing hub which promises several hundred jobs and increased exports.
But opponents, including local activists and environmentalists, warn that construction is already decimating valuable coastal vegetation, threatening the habitat of critically endangered animals and putting the island at greater risk of hurricane damage.
Chinese-funded development and infrastructure projects  often delivered via low-interest loans  are not new in the Caribbean.
What sets the Yida project apart  in addition to its sheer size, which spans more than 2,000 acres  is that Chinese investors have been given a license to establish their own special economic zone for the new communitys residents and businesses who will benefit from tax waivers.
Under an agreement signed in 2015, developers are entitled to set up a seafood harvesting company within the zone and net 90% of the profits. The zone is also free of all taxes levied elsewhere in the country, including income tax, sales tax and import and export duties. Anyone investing more than $400,000 will be eligible for Antiguan citizenship.
That has caused dismay among some locals, who liken the zone to a colony.
It will operate like a state within a state, said George Wehner, who grew up close to the area. It will totally change our way of life. Fisherfolk have relied on these waters for generations; its one of our most important breeding grounds for marine life and destroying it threatens our food security.
Last June, Antigua and Barbuda became the first country in the eastern Caribbean to sign up for Chinas Belt and Road initiative, a global trade project consisting of a network of ports, railways, tunnels and other infrastructure.
Chinas Belt and Road Initiative is a huge, $1tn infrastructure project to better connect China  and Chinese goods  with the rest of the world. It is meant to be a 21st-century "silk road", made up of a "belt" of overland corridors (including roads, bridges and railways) and a maritime "road" of shipping lanes.
Its wider ambitions are harder to pin down. Is it a bid by China for world domination, or simply a move to prop up Chinese companies at home? Is there a grand strategy, or is it just a rebranding of existing projects?
InCities of the New Silk Roadwe have endeavoured to find out, by exploring the project's tangible results so far  from the newly built city of Khorgos on the Kazakhstan border to Duisburg, dubbed Germanys China city. Our correspondents have reported fromthe next Dubai rising out of the sea in Sri Lanka, the nascent port of Gwadar in a restive province of Pakistan, the sleepy Tanzanian village that could be transformed into Africas largest port, and more.Nick Van Mead
Read more: Cities of the New Silk Road
Newly constructed buildings are already clearly visible on the razed landscape of Antiguas north-east coast. From the water, work appears well underway on the gargantuan 