
Amazon Echo Show (2nd gen) review: Alexa's bigger, brighter smart display
The latest smart speaker with screen looks better, sounds great and has built-in smart hub

Samuel Gibbs


Tue 15 Jan 2019 06.00GMT


Last modified on Mon 18 Mar 2019 10.00GMT


The new second generation Echo Show is bigger with a better display, but is size enough to keep Amazon ahead of stiff competition from Google?
Since the original Echo Show launched last year the software has been refined, but the experience is broadly the same. The Show is a voice-first Alexa speaker, with touch interactivity as an additional input rather than the core experience. If you never wanted to touch the screen beyond the initial set-up ,you wouldnt have to.
When you do go to touch it, swipes and taps work as you might expect from a modern smartphone. Swipe down from the top to reveal a quick settings shade, including a smart home control panel, a place to trigger Alexa routines and one-tap access to alarms.
You can swipe through various news, sports, reminders and calendar events, through the visual cards that accompany Alexas answers such as extended weather forecasts, and swipe to dismiss alarms and timers.
Even the on-screen keyboard works like a smartphones, although it quickly gets tiring to use it at arms length on the screen. Fortunately you only really need it for typing out passwords.
The screen is now much larger at 10.1in on the diagonal, 720p HD, crisper and of higher quality. The difference is night and day between the old and new Echo Show.
The design of the device looks a lot better too, shrinking the device around the screen and moving the speakers to the back of the casing. Theres still a camera above the screen for selfies and video calling, which can now connect you to Skype as well as Amazon devices and the Alexa app.
The improved screen makes it a better digital photo frame, displaying photos from your Amazon Photos library or various stock images. The size also helps with visibility from across the room, but somehow it looks more imposing than even the monolithic design of the old device.
The lump at the back contains the speakers, which like the screen are significantly improved but less direct than the front-facing speakers of the previous device.
The Show is the best-sounding smart display currently on the market, blowing away Googles Home Hub.
The two 2in speakers and passive bass radiator produce a wider soundscape than most smart speakers and can easily fill a room, sounding best at around volume level 5 out of 10. Tracks such as the live version of Hotel California from Hell Freezes Over by the Eagles have a far richer tone, better separation and sparkle than previous Echos.
The Show deals with most genres well. Feed it a track such as Forgot About Dre and you get a punchy bassline that doesnt bludgeon the lyrics. George Ezras Shotgun sounds warm and upbeat, Rita Oras Let You Love Me sounds sharp, while Smells Like Teen Spirit has the right amount of attack. Even classics such as String Quartet in E flat sound clean and precise.
It shows its weakness with high-energy tracks such as Daft Punks Derezzed, which sound somewhat flat, but Tychos more relaxed Jetty sounds great. It doesnt have really deep bass (you can pair a separate 120 Echo Sub with it if you want more bass) or any real 