Tim Anderson has kept the same energy, but can he keep the same pace?
Days after Tim Anderson’s bat flipped the baseball world upside down, he demonstrated that he had every intention to stay in the center of the baseball universe.

Not a full 24-hours passed until Anderson, who is Black, was suspended for his use of the n-word after getting pegged by Royals pitcher Brad Keller, the 25-year-old shortstop published his highlight-reel play that year into a video mixtape on his Twitter account.
Anderson’s dramatic home runs and stylish celebrations weren’t the only notable part of his video. His dramatic home runs and stylish celebrations were backed up by “Clout,” a popular song from hip hop artist Offset. Like most rap music, the trap single featured a black artist liberally using the n-word, without inhibition. There was nothing Keller, the umpires, or Major League Baseball could do about it.

The White Sox have not made the playoffs since 2008, and in 2018, lost 100 games, their worst total in nearly 50 years. This year, they’re not contenders, but they’re competitive, coming into the series against the Yankees with a 32-34. Anderson’s .314 average has been vital to their upswing, and the 25-year-old shortstop’s swagger is essential to the game’s long-term appeal. His body of work has earned the starting All-Star consideration, he ranks fourth in votes among AL shortstops.

Being Black in Baseball: Larry Doby fought for freedom, Tim Anderson fights for autonomy »
However, while the White Sox continue to hang in the outer-fringes of the American League Wild Card hunt, his play on the field has lagged as the season has progressed.

On April 17, the day Anderson admired his 418 feet a little too much for Keller’s tastes, he was averaging .424 on the young season. Since then, he’s hitting an empty .274 with just five home runs. Always a hacker at the plate, Anderson has zero walks in June.

To be clear, unless Ted Williams ascends from his cryogenic chamber to give Anderson some hitting tips, no one should expect Anderson, or anybody else, to sustain a .400 batting average for long. But his offensive game since April has been the only ordinary thing about him.

Still, there are reasons to believe that more mixtapes are coming. A basketball standout at Hillcrest High Schooll in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, Anderson didn’t play high school baseball until he was a junior. He is not a product of expensive travel teams or elite training facilities, but a natural talent still doing the hard work of translating his athletic talent into on-field baseball skills.

On the whole, Anderson’s still hitting the ball much, much harder than he used to. Anderson’s hard-hit percentage, which measures exactly what it sounds like it does, is at 39.3 percent for the season, up nearly 12 points from last year. He’s swinging and missing less, too, striking out about five percent less than he did in 2018 overall and making more contact against hard and soft stuff from opposing pitchers. He’s getting fooled less and making pitchers pay, no matter what kind of pitch they throw. At age 25, Anderson is still getting better, even in a slump.
