Kyoto Animation Streams Myriad Colors Phantom World Anime's Comiket Promo
posted on 2015-12-29 12:15 UTC-8 by Rafael Antonio Pineda

The official website for the anime of Soichiro Hatano's 
Myriad Colors Phantom World (Musaigen no Phantom World) novel began streaming a promotional video on Tuesday. 
The video previews the anime's opening theme song "Naked Dive" by SCREEN mode, 
and it debuted at the Kyoto Animation and Animation DO Shop's booth in this week's Comic Market (Comiket) 89 event.

The story of the original novel takes place in the near future, in a world born of human imagination. 
What humans would call ghosts or monsters appear, and they come to be called "phantoms." 
The main character, Haruhiko Ichijo, is a first year at Hosea Academy along with his upperclassman Mai Kawakami, 
who fights phantoms with the ability "Spirit of Five Elements," 
Reina Izumi, who has the ability "Phantom Eater," 
and Koito Minase, who fights phantoms in solitude. 
They experience the ups and downs of high school life before a certain incident leads them to the truth of this world.

The anime will premiere on Wednesday, January 6 on Tokyo MX at 00:00 (effectively midnight on Thursday morning). 
The show will also air on ABC Asahi, TV Aichi, and BS11.

The show stars:
Hiro Shimono as Haruhiko Ichijo, a 15-year-old first-year A-class student in Hosea Academy's High School Division.
Sumire Uesaka as Mai Kawakami, a 16-year-old second-year A-class student in Hosea Academy's High School Division.
Saori Hayami as Reina Izumi, a 15-year-old first-year B-class student in Hosea Academy's High School Division.
Maaya Uchida as Koito Minase, a 16-year-old first-year C-class student in Hosea Academy's High School Division.
Azusa Tadokoro as Ruru, a fairy phantom who can fit in the palm of a human's hand.
Misaki Kuno as Kurumi Kumamakura, a 10-year-old fourth-year 2-class student in Hosea Academy's Elementary School Division.
Kikuko Inoue as Arisu Himeno, a 26-year-old Japanese language instructor for Hosea Academy's High School Division.
Daisuke Sakaguchi as Shosuke Morohashi, a 15-year old B-class student in Hosea Academy's High School Division.

Tatsuya Ishihara (The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya, Love, Chunibyo & Other Delusions!, Sound! Euphonium) 
is directing the series at Kyoto Animation, 
and Kazumi Ikeda (Clannad television anime, second Kanon television anime, Love, Chunibyo & Other Delusions!) 
is designing the characters and serving as chief animation director. 
Shirabi provided the original illustrations for Hatano's novel. 
Fumihiko Shimo (Kokoro Connect, Infinite Stratos, Clannad) is in charge of series composition, 
and EFFY is composing the soundtrack.
Azusa Tadokoro will perform the ending theme.
The other staff members are as follows:
Art Director: Mikiko Watanabe
Color Key: Kana Miyata
Accessories Planning: Hiroshi Karata
Phantom Design: Shinpei Sawa
Director of Photography: Ryuuta Nakagami
Sound Director: Yota Tsuruoka

Kyoto Animation's novel imprint published the novel written by Hatano and illustrated by Shirabi in December 2013. 
The book was an honorable mention in the fourth Kyoto Animation Awards.
