Wimbledon under pressure to ban plastic bottles over littered courts
British tennis players including Johanna Konta and Kyle Edmund have raised the issue of plastic waste and rubbish at Wimbledon.
By Lucia Binding, news reporter
Wimbledon has come under pressure to ban plastic bottles amid criticism of litter left behind on courts.
British number one Johanna Konta raised the issue after her first-round victory against Natalia Vikhlyantseva.
When asked about the number of plastic bottles used at the championships, she said: "In terms of water bottles and things like that, I personally don't have water bottles at home.
"I have a filtration system. I have glass containers which I then put in the fridge. I try not to use plastic bags or anything like that."
The Sydney-born player, 27, added: "I think it's a battle that everyone is facing. I'm a big fan of looking after our planet because we've only got one."
Evian is the official supplier of bottled water of Wimbledon, extending its multimillion-pound sponsorship last year until 2022.
Tennis coach Sascha Bajin - who has recently joined Japanese player Naomi Osaka's team - tweeted a picture of a Wimbledon practice court littered with rubbish, including plastic bottles.
View image on Twitter

He wrote: "Dear players/coaches @Wimbledon it's not to hard to take your empty water bottles and throw them away after practise.
"The grounds people are supposed to take care of the court and not clean trash. Maybe the club could provide a trash can for every 2nd court tho as well. #justsayin." (sic)
Dozens of other Twitter users have posted about the problem.
British tennis player Kyle Edmund also complained of courts being dirty, admitting players are "too lazy" to clean up after themselves.
The male British number one said: "That's been a problem at every tournament, that players are too lazy to pick up their water bottles, myself included."
He added: "We're professional tennis players, we should obviously look after our rubbish. I always try to do the best I can to clean up after myself."
Earlier this year, Evian announced that all of its bottles will be made of 100% recycled plastic by 2025.
Currently, its bottles only contain 25% recycled plastic, even though all are recyclable.
"Evian, whom we recently renewed with for a further five years, have similarly announced their commitment to achieve circular recycling by 2025," a spokeswoman for the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club (AELTC) said.
"We are proud to have a partnership with Evian, and value their support in helping to sustain the running of the championships and the All England Club for the long-term.
"Where possible the AELTC uses RPET (100% recycled plastic) containers which are then able to be recycled again after use."