Sekai Project Adds NEKOPARA Extra, 6 Other Games
posted on 2018-07-08 08:15 UTC-8 by Jennifer Sherman

Video game localization company and publisher Sekai Project announced at Anime Expo on Saturday that it will release the following games:
NEKOPARA Extra ~The Kittens' First Promise
9 -nine-
Last Stanza
Re;Lord 2 ~The witch of Cologne and black cat~
Idol Connect -AsteriskLive-
Harumade Kururu
Witch's Love Diary
The company will also release the NEKOPARA manga.

In addition, Sekai Project announced other release details and updates:
Koi Kuma will have the official English title The Ditzy Demons Are In Love With Me, and it will launch on Steam.
Volume 2 of Data Morgana will launch physically and digitally on Kindle at the end of July. The release will launch on Comixology later this year.
A demo of Maho Arms will be available after Anime Expo.
The company will reveal a release date for Majo Koi Nikki in the future.

Neko Works' NEKOPARA Extra ~The Kittens' First Promise and its original video anime (OVA) adaptation are slated to launch on Steam on July 27. 
Sekai Project describes game:
A prequel to the very popular NEKOPARA series, NEKOPARA Extra takes us inside the Minaduki household when Chocola and Vanilla first arrive.
After being taken in by Kashou and his little sister, Shigure, the young kittens, Chocola and Vanilla find it difficult to fit in. 
Despite the warm welcome the other Minaduki catgirls give to them, they act with trepidation as they adjust to the pace of the family.

As they slowly interact with their fellow sister catgirls, Chocola and Vanilla begin to open up more and it's here we see Kashou's kindness towards them that builds up their feelings towards him.

The game was a stretch goal for Sekai Project's 2017 Kickstarter campaign to create an OVA based on Neko Works and Sayori's NEKOPARA adult visual novel. 
The Kickstarter campaign also funded a 12-minute OVA of the prequel game as another stretch goal.

Sekai Project will release the first chapter of Tam-U's NEKOPARA manga of the Nekopara game through Kobo, Amazon, Comixology and other distributors in August. 
The company describes the manga:
Just announced recently at Winter Comiket and tells the story of Kashou Minazuki, the son of a long line of Japanese Confectionary Makers, 
as he moves out to establish his own shop, “La Soleil” 
and strives to become a successful patisserie. 
He is not left alone for long however as two of his family's cute catgirls stow away to join him.
Neko Works announced on Tuesday that CFK's PlayStation 4 and Nintendo Switch versions of Neko Works' Nekopara Vol. 1 
game have been delayed in some regions. 
The PS4 version has been delayed from July 4 to a general summer 2018 release window in Japan, North America, and Europe. 
The Nintendo Switch version has been delayed from July 4 to a general July release in Europe, 
but the version launched as planned in Japan and North America on Wednesday.

Sekai Project released the Nekopara Vol. 1 visual novel on PC via Steam in December 2014. 
The company also released the Nekopara Vol. 0 fandisc prequel on PC in August 2015, 
and the Nekopara Vol. 2 game in February 2016. 
Neko Works released Nekopara Vol. 3 in Japan in May 2017, 
and Sekai Project released the game on Steam in English on the same day. 
The game series has sold more than 2 million copies.

Sekai Project will release Palette's 9 -nine- in the fourth quarter of 2018. 
The company describes the game:
Shiromitsugawa City. An academic city with no particularly special characteristics. 
There had been projects to revitalize the city by drawing in tourists, none of which succeeded. 
Yet, unexpectedly this city has drawn the attention of the world.
In the city lives a young man by the name of Kakeru Niimi. 
Though he is prone to being blunt, he is a reliable individual who lives life with a strong sense of responsibility. 
For what it's worth, he has a kind personality and treats those around him with great importance. 
Though it seems like he lives a peaceful life as an ordinary student, 
with the destruction of a sacred relic of the Shrine of the White Serpent's Relic, his life has changed.

In the midst of all this appear youths with supernatural powers. 
It was just a town with no particularly special characteristics and a very unassumingly normal student. 
Kakeru Niimi finds himself wrapped up in this mysterious fate caused by the appearance of these supernatural individuals...

The visual novel series features multiple volumes that focus on individual heroines. 
The first volume centers on Miyako Kujo. Palette also developed the Saku Saku: Love Blooms with the Cherry Blossoms game.

Sekai Project describes InnocenceInnocence's Last Stanza game:
It was a day in the last week of December 2009, when I found out that slowly dripping tears had a shivering yet uneasy feeling. 
The winter turned the air thin and cold, the clouds blocked the sunlight that normally reaches the ground making it feel like the sun was absent.
Days after, I was back on my daily routine, as if nothing had happened, trying to conceal my anger and confusion, 
slowly regaining control of my thoughts, opening my heart to friends old and new, trying at any cost to find a new place for myself.

But it's in the peaceful moments when the storms settle and the turbulent oceans lose their motions, 
that any rock can set a chain reaction creating an infinitude of waves, 
bringing back to the shores of my thoughts the emotions that I had kept away for so long.

Sekai Project will release Escu:de's Re;Lord 2 ~The witch of Cologne and black cat~ game on PC via Steam soon. 
The company describes the game:
In the second title in the strip RPG battle trilogy, Re;Lord by Escu;de, our hero Wilfred and his companions are back once again. 
After retaking Herfort, he sets his sights on doing battle with the witch, Iris, in order to liberate all of Groessen.
Cologne, a land filled with grassy plains and home to the country's fishing industry and the popular tourist spot, Bebra Lake, 
is under the control of the witch Iris who has turned the denizens of this peaceful land into crow familiars, spirits and devilish fiends.
While he questions why the witch Iris has taken this territory, for the sake of retaking this land he goes into battle once more.

Sekai Project describes CreativeFrontier's Idol Connect -AsteriskLive- game:
Sometime, somewhere in the future.
In a tiny little idol production office that you run, nine girls -- idols -- are gathered. 
With no dreams, and no goals. 
But the moment they stand on stage, something in them changes.

This is a story of how ordinary girls eventually bring their voices to the world. 
A story of how ordinary girls eventually connect as idols. "...Just what is an idol?"
At the Asterisk Live, an idol festival that happens once a year... 
You alone, as their producer, can guide them to the answer that awaits them there.
CreativeFrontier's smartphone game of the same name inspired the visual novel for PC.

Sekai Project describes Sumikko Software's Harumade Kururu game:

A Certain Situation
Of course, even if I put it that way there's no way I can explain the situation I'm in...
In any case, I find myself with 4 other girls on a long spring break far away from civilization. 
To emphasize how middle of nowhere this is, there isn't even a convenience store here. 
I don't have a cell phone and despite having some rather good laptop computers, 
I have no way to connect to the internet. 
All that's here is a large dormitory the likes you'd see at a hot springs resort and a school that looks like it's on the verge of closing down. 
There's a farm that's closed and fields with ripening winter vegetables. 
In the distance you can see snow capped mountains and the beautiful, clear waters of the sea.
...and out in the distance stood a tower of unimaginable height who's purpose was anyone's guess which stretched into the depths of the sky.

This wasn't a fantasy, or something out of sci-fi or even a mystery. 
With all that going on, the only intent was to spend some peaceful days with these four girls but that was totally not what was about to happen. 
One girl. In a quiet summer that's quite prone to crazy happenings. 
And these words that come out of her mouth.
"We'll make this place a harem for him!"
Wait, when you say harem, uhm... well... Huh???? 
I wondered what she meant by that as she took off her clothes and the events of that summer unfolded...
The game is Sumikko Software's fifth title.

Sekai Project describes qoobrand's Witch's Love Diary game:

In a barbershop of the shopping district, lived a girl named Alive Nanjo.
In the spring, which marked her 2nd year at the academy, there was nothing particular about it 
as the same train she'd always take shook as it moved across town and she spent time as usual with her friends.
Then one day.
While Alice and her friends were investigating a clock tower in a forest on the outskirts of the academy, 
she picked up a mysterious diary that fell from the tower. 
Taking it home, she gently opened up the diary and there she found the contents of a young man's daily life.
The game is qoobrand's first title.
