
Shanghai Sacred: inside China's religious revival  photo essay
Photographer and anthropologist Liz Hingley uncovers the spiritual landscape of Chinas largest city, revealing the spaces and rituals of this cosmopolitan megalopolis that is home to 26 million people  and to religious groups from Buddhism to Islam, Christianity to Bahaism, Hinduism to Taoism


Thu 20 Jun 2019 07.00BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 10.10BST


By ritual, heaven and earth harmoniously combine
For the last thirty to forty years China has been undergoing one of the great religious revivals of our time. Hundreds of millions of people disturbed by the pace of advancement in their country are turning to faith for the meaning and hope they dont find in the radically secular world around them. This search for the sacred is shifting social structures and shaping Chinas future in new and significant ways.
Fire ceremony gathering (2016)
With more than 24 million residents, Shanghai is Chinas largest city and the 10th wealthiest in the world. It is famous for economic dynamism and architectural daring, and has become synonymous with consumerism. At the same time, it is at the forefront of religious resurgence. Rooted in history, this revival has swept in on the tide of globalisation, fed by the inventiveness of the Chinese people.
Xu Guangqi Memorial Hall  A memorial for the Chinese scholar, statesman and Catholic convert Xu Guangqi (1562-1633) is located in a small park named after him
After decades of suppression during the Mao era, the number of followers of Chinas five official religions  Buddhism, Taoism, Islam, Catholicism and Protestantism  are steadily rising alongside a rich range of unofficial groups and alternative spiritual practices. It is a remarkable recovery, especially considering the destruction of religious infrastructure and knowledge, and continued political suppression.
Noodles for Shanghai Shabbat (2016)
Shanghai Sacred explores the spaces, rituals and communities  in official, unofficial, public and private forms  that together weave the spiritual fabric of the city. Intimate photographs document the creativity of the faithful when creating sacred space in a dense and restless urban environment.
Fang Sheng gathering, Changning district (2015)
The traditional east Asian Buddhist practice of freeing captive animals to accrue good karma has flourished dramatically in recent years in Shanghai, in step with the rise of social media and online money donation, which keeps the practice afloat. Here hundreds of inhabitants gather to liberate $3,000 (2,400) worth of fish bought from the market that morning. Monks or devout lay people organise weekly devotional gatherings, performing the ritual throughout the public space, thus creating a new economy for fishermen and a sense of belonging in an ever-changing urban environment.
Fang Sheng gathering, Shanghai Ferry Port (2015)
Memorial Hall of the First Congress of the Chinese Communist party, Xintiandi area (2015)
In 1921, the Chinese Communist party (CCP) was founded in Shanghai. This museum venerates the party and preserves the official memories of this occasion with a waxwork of Mao Zedong at the founding meeting. This space is part of the sacred geography of the city and a place that Chinese tourists visit in a reverent manner.
The Longhua Revolutionary Martyrs Memorial (2015)
The Longhua Revolutionary Martyrs cemetery commemorates the CCP members and other activists who died during the revolutionary struggles of 1928-37. Located on a former section of the grounds of the Longhua Buddhist temple, it is part of the sacred geography of Shanghai.
Shanghai Daoist College at Dongyue temple (2015)
Dongyue temple hosts one 