Hunting in the wilderness: How Bill de Blasio, Kirsten Gillibrand and others are straining to connect with Democratic primary voters
The mayor of New York City, Bill de Blasio, and the junior senator from New York, Kirsten Gillibrand, are both running for president. But a third candidate from New York seemed to get a far more rapturous reception in South Carolina this weekend: Andrew Yang, the tech entrepreneur whose campaign is largely predicated on his call for a $1,000 monthly cash payment to every American. In amusing contrast to his understated, affable manner, Yang appeared to have the most boisterous klatch of supporters following him around from event to event, perhaps rivaling only Bernie Sanders for that distinction. Rep. James Clyburn, the grand poobah of the weekend’s festivities, introduced him as “the leader of the Yang Gang” to roars of approval at Clyburn’s namesake Fish Fry, held Friday night in Columbia.
When he addressed the South Carolina Democratic convention Saturday, Yang posed the same rhetorical question he typically does in speeches and press interviews — in essence, why did Donald Trump get elected in 2016? But less typical was the audience response: a vocal segment of attendees shouted “treason,” which Yang appeared to dismiss as one of many shallow explanations "bandied around cable news.” He tends to attribute Trump’s victory to the loss of manufacturing jobs by automation.
You’d have to excuse voters for assuming that treason was the reason for Trump’s election, however, because a growing number of major political figures have been suggesting exactly that. Perhaps impelled by the relative lack of enthusiasm their campaigns have drawn, both de Blasio and Gillibrand seem to be resorting to heightened rhetorical attacks on Trump as a kind of shallow compensation for the grassroots energy they have so far failed to muster. Most of the candidates by now have called for initiating impeachment proceedings, but de Blasio is apparently the only one to directly accuse the president of betraying the country.
Asked if he was alleging that Trump committed treason, de Blasio replied, “a hundred percent” — referring to the interview with George Stephanopoulos on June 16 in which Trump indicated that he’d be willing to receive information offered to him by non-Americans. “I’ve never seen a president of the United States overtly welcome foreign intervention in an election; this goes beyond anything he has said or done previously,” de Blasio told me. “He was sending a clear signal to hostile nations to find dirt on his opponents, and he made very clear he would make it worth their while.”
Gillibrand won’t quite go so far as to accuse Trump of committing a high crime punishable by death, but she nonetheless insists that a key plank of the Mueller investigation has not yet been resolved and requires further Congressional inquiry. Asked if she viewed Trump’s alleged collusion with Russia as a settled issue, Gillibrand replied “no,” stating that it should be incorporated into any forthcoming impeachment investigation undertaken by the House of Representatives. “You could investigate all of it as part of an impeachment proceeding,” she said. (Beto O’Rourke also told me that he does not view collusion as a settled issue, and that it should be further investigated by Congress as a component of impeachment proceedings.) 
Yang, de Blasio, and Gillibrand joined 18 other candidates in sporting a bright blue t-shirt that bore Clyburn’s name when they trotted out onstage late Friday night at the Fish Fry. Posing for a smiling group photo, they gave the appearance of kids boarding a bus for a school trip — the ultimate expression of fealty to Clyburn, and an indicator of the vast political power he wields in South Carolina. But Clyburn denied that he had explicitly advocated that his t-shirts be worn. “It must be peer pressure, because I didn’t ask them to,” he told me. “I was as surprised as you.”
Part of the reason why de Blasio, Gillibrand and others seem to be donning silly t-shirts and going into rhetorical overdrive is because they’re grasping for any available tactic to undercut the support currently enjoyed by Joe Biden, whose imposing lead in the polls — especially in South Carolina — was the implicit theme of this weekend’s events. “I think I’ve been saying for months now, when Joe Biden decided to run for president, everybody else would be running for second place in South Carolina. I said that six months ago,” Clyburn told me. “I know how people here feel about Joe Biden.”
To emphasize Biden’s connection to the state, he continued: “Joe Biden vacations here three or four times a year. I think people forget that Joe Biden probably spends more time in Charleston than I do,” Clyburn said, laughing. 
“South Carolinians are basically faith voters, and they believe in Scripture. And there’s a passage in Scripture that goes well with South Carolinians. You know them by their deeds, not their words,” Clyburn proclaimed. Faith that Biden will continue the Obama legacy evidently animates much of Biden’s current support base. One Fish Fry attendee, a black man in his early 60s who would identify himself only as “F,” gave me his rationale for backing Biden at this juncture: “People believed in Obama — they also believe in Joe Biden. Because he was the vice president. And Joe Biden, he did a damn good job. So that weighs in his favor.”
The task then falls to other candidates, such as de Blasio, to demonstrate why they should instead be the natural choice of South Carolina’s overwhelmingly black Democratic electorate. In an interview with me, de Blasio pointed out that he defeated “a very capable African-American opponent,” city controller Bill Thompson, in the 2013 mayoral primary race and predicted that the accomplishment could translate on a national level. “When that primary was over I won the black vote,” de Blasio asserted, reiterating his belief that the status quo is not working for most blacks and he is uniquely suited to change it on their behalf.
“I would only say again, with real respect for the vice president, he has not shown to me that he is going to change that status quo,” de Blasio said. 
Meanwhile, Biden himself appears to be avoiding the press at all costs. The only opportunity to interact with him at the Fish Fry was to follow him around on the rope-line in hopes that he would deign to answer questions. One voter asked him if his fellow presidential candidates were moving too far to the left; Biden waved off any notion of excess division in the party.
“Everybody up there basically agrees,” he said of his fellow Democrats. But one point of ostensible disagreement is that Biden is the only remaining “top tier” candidate to not call for the initiation of impeachment proceedings. I asked him why he has so far refrained from doing so.
“First of all, that’s not true,” he replied. “Second, [I don’t answer questions] with guys like you on the line because you misrepresent what I said.” But I hadn’t misrepresented anything. Every running tally of where the Democratic candidates stand on impeachment shows that Biden is one of the few who has still not taken a clear position, and he has continuously avoided questions on the subject. 
Other candidates have at least shown the capacity to answer the question directly. For instance, when pressed, Jay Inslee, the governor of Washington — who had also previously been non-committal — called for the impeachment process to begin. Trump now presents “a threat to national security,” Inslee told me. “Yeah, they should start,” he said of impeachment proceedings. “It’s time.”
Biden’s unwillingness to answer simple questions can’t be politically tenable for much longer. Perhaps de Blasio is not quite the right messenger to point out his flaws, but the flaws do appear to be increasingly glaring. Relying on the afterglow of Obama might be a decent preliminary strategy, especially in a primary electorate like South Carolina’s where Obama is still wildly popular. But the glow could be wearing off. And if that’s the case, the only “misrepresentation” will have been Biden’s current lead in the polls.
