Crunchyroll to Stream Robot Girls Z Comedy Anime
posted on 2014-01-28 06:18 UTC-8 by Egan Loo
Show with super robots reimagined as girls premiered this month

Media service Crunchyroll announced on Monday that it will stream the Robot Girls Z anime as it airs in Japan. 
The series will be available for viewers in North America, South America, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and Scandinavia.

The anime is the latest incarnation of Toei Robot Girls, the project that turns Dynamic Planning 
and Toei Animation's "legendary super robots into beautiful girls!!"

The stars of the new Robot Girls Z series are Z-chan, Gre-chan, and Grenda-san. 
Together they (try to) defend Photon Power Town from "the enemy, the mechanical beast girls of the underground empire." 
The villains are led by Baron Ashura, the underground emperor "bent on world domination(?)" — or at least, town domination.

Mariko Honda plays the hot-blooded leader Z-chan, a reference to Mazinger Z.
Inori Minase plays the steely calm game-playing professional Gre-chan, a reference to Great Mazinger.
Kazusa Aranami plays the seemingly airheaded but possibly scheming Grenda-san, a reference to UFO Robo Grendizer.
Maaya Uchida plays 14-year-old Gecchan, a reference to Go Nagai's robot franchise Getter Robo. 
She is extremely spoiled and blunt, and although she has lots of firepower, she is also capricious. 
She needs lavish praising to operate at her full potential. 
Her weapons of choice are her familiar Getter Tomahawk and Getter Beam.
Minami Tsuda plays 20-year-old Zieg-san, a reference to Go Nagai's Kotetsu Zieg manga and anime. 
She is the head of a super-popular circle at dojinshi events. 
She is the oldest of the robot girls and is happiest when she recounts her past exploits of valor. 
Her weapons are Knuckle Bomber, Spin Storm, and Mach Drill.
Aya Hisakawa plays Baron Ashura
Yukiko Morishita plays Garada-chan (Garada K7)
Nao Toyama plays Doublas-chan (Doublas M2)
Yuna Taniguchi plays Geromazen R9
Momoko Matsui plays Gaia Q5
Saori Goto plays King Dan X10
Kanako Miyamoto plays Gerossum X2 
Aya Suzaki plays Poses O2
Saki Hatanaka plays Baranga M2
Mika Kikuchi plays Minerva X 
Shizuka Furuya plays Line X1 
Hibiku Yamamura plays Belgas V5

Honda, Minase, Aranami, Uchida, and Tsuda also form Kikai Shojo Tai (Mechanical Girl Team), 
the group that performs the anime's title theme song "Robot Girls Z" heard in the video above. 
Robot Girls Kenkyusho Ongaku-bu wrote the lyrics, and ARM (IOSYS) composed and arranged the music. 
Nippon Columbia will sell the single next year.

The television episodes will have the return of Satomi Satou as Gacky (Ga-Keen), 
Ayumi Tsuji as Bara-tan (Baratack), Kaori Takaoka as Gai-chan (Gaiking), 
and Chiharu Kitaoka as Dandan (Danguard Ace) from the earlier Toei Robot Girls project.

Hiroshi Ikehata (original Toei Robot Girls, Ring ni Kakero 1: Sekai Taikai-hen) is directing the new anime, 
and Kazuho Hyodo (Tactical Roar) is in charge of the scripts. 
Tetsuya Kawakami (Shigofumi - Letters from the Departed, Toei Robot Girls) designed the characters.

The series premiered on January 4 on the CS broadcast satellite system's Toei Channel. 
Each month has a three-episode arc, starting with "fullbokko: 1 Kami ka Akuma ka!? Tojo-hen" (Enter the God, or Devil!?).
