CORRECTED: Wall St seen up slightly before price, retail data

 Corrects 7th paragraph to show Home Depot reported a lower quarterly profit, not flat, and 8th paragraph to say FOMC minutes are to be released on Wednesday, not Tuesday, and FOMC minutes are for meeting on October 24-25, not October 24 

 By Marie Maitre PARIS  (Reuters) - Shares on Wall Street are expected to open slightly higher at best on Tuesday as investors hope that retail sales data will show the U.S. economy is slowing but still strong enough to sustain future corporate profits. Investors will also scour the publication of U.S. producer prices, which many expect to be on the weak side after further declines in oil prices. Producer prices are expected to have fallen 0.5 percent in October, but to have risen 0.1 percent excluding volatile food and energy prices. <ID:nN13186788> "This data should confirm a slowdown in inflation," CM-CIC economist Valerie Plagnol said, adding that minutes due later on Tuesday of the Federal Reserve's last interest rate-setting meeting were likely to indicate that the central bank is set to stick to its wait-and-see attitude. At 1100 GMT, U.S. stock futures were pointing to opening gains of around 0.1 percent for the three main indexes SPc1 DJc1 NDc1. On Monday, the Dow Jones industrial average  .DJI  rose 0.19 percent to close at 12,131.88 and the Standard & Poor's 500 Index  .SPX  edged up 0.25 percent to 1,384.42, while the Nasdaq Composite Index  .IXIC  ended up 0.70 percent at 2,406.38. Retailers will hog the limelight as home improvement chain Home Depot ( HD.N ), office supplies seller Staples ( SPLS.O ), discount chain Target ( TGT.N ) and Wal-Mart Stores ( WMT.N ) report, while the auto sector will also be in focus as President George W. Bush meets executives from Ford Motor Co. ( F.N ), General Motors Corp. ( GM.N ) and Chrysler. Home Depot reported a lower quarterly profit that missed analysts' estimates as consumers backed away from big-ticket purchases amid the U.S. housing slowdown. Interest rate-wary investors will also follow comments by the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and San Francisco, as well as Wednesday's publication of minutes from the Fed's policy-setting meeting of October 24-25. On the corporate front, mergers and acquisitions could give markets a shot in the arm. Bootmaker Timberland TBL.N is exploring a plan to sell itself, the Wall Street Journal reported, citing people familiar with the matter. It said Timberland, valued at nearly $2 billion, had hired Goldman Sachs ( GS.N ) to help run the process. El Al Israel Airlines ( ELAL.TA ) canceled its option to buy eight to 10 new Boeing ( BA.N ) 787 jets, Israel's Yedioth Ahronoth daily reported.