Giants ride huge 7th inning to victory, 7-1
Reyes Moronta finished off a great start for Madison Bumgarner. Steven Duggar led the offense with two doubles and three runs scored.
The Bay Bridge Trophy is dumb. Nobody cares about the Battle of the Bay series. Except for maybe A’s fans, and that’s because they don’t have a proper rival. The A’s are the equivalent of the Greyjoys in Game of Thrones. They’re annoying but otherwise harmless. I might even root for them when they’re not trying to come into the Giants’ house and take things over. Still, they don’t hold a candle to LA-nnisters down south.

That doesn’t mean I don’t want the Giants to win that trophy.

That’s probably going to be the only trophy the Giants can win all year, and they just need three more to be able to take it home and shove in a closet until next year.

Madison Bumgarner looked like Madison Bumgarner tonight. He had command of all four of his pitches and he could spot the fastball at all corners of the zone. He masterfully played with the eye level of the A’s hitters throwing curves down below the zone and finishing them off with a fastball at the letters. The bendy boys were the key to his success tonight as he often resorted to the hook in two-strike counts.

He made one mistake to Chad Pinder, who sent a pitch into a tunnel in left-center. It wasn’t even that bad of a pitch. He threw him a fastball at the belt, it was off the plate by a few inches. Pinder had no business pulling it with that kind of power.

Pinder had already robbed Bumgarner of his first extra base hit earlier in the game. In the third, Bumgarner sent a pitch to the warning track, but Pinder tracked it down running headlong into the outfield wall.

Bumgarner only allowed the one run on the homer to Pinder. This was partly due to him being excellent. Largely, it was because Reyes Moronta completely bailed him out. Bumgarner began the seventh giving up a single to Stephen Piscotty and walks to Matts Olson and Chapman.

Moronta came in with the bases loaded and nobody out. The Giants had a meager 2-1 lead at that point. All it would have taken was a sacrifice fly. That would have tied the game sending it into extra innings where the Giants would have lost in the seventeenth.

But Moronta promptly struck out newly-minted Giant slayer, Chad Pinder. Then Pablo Sandoval made a diving catch on a line drive down the third base line. Finally, he got Nick Martini to ground out to short.

I’m stunned Johnathan Lucroy even hit the ball as hard as he did with the way Moronta threw the ball. When Moronta came into the game, the Giants had a 38.6% win expectancy. When he left, they had a 79.6% chance of winning the game.