Home Depot cuts outlook amid housing downturn

 ATLANTA  (Reuters) - Home Depot Inc. ( HD.N ) on Tuesday reported a 3 percent drop in third-quarter profit that missed Wall Street estimates, and sharply cut its forecast for earnings growth this year as the U.S. housing slowdown crimps spending on big-ticket projects. 

 The world's largest home improvement retailer said weakness would likely continue into 2007, and its shares fell 1 percent. "I don't think we've seen the bottom yet," Home Depot Chairman Robert Nardelli said during a conference call. "I don't see anything that suggests it's going to get significantly better in '07." Earnings fell to $1.49 billion, or 73 cents a share, for the third quarter ended October 29, from $1.54 billion, or 72 cents a share, a year earlier. It was Home Depot's first decline in quarterly profit since the fourth quarter of 2002. Analysts, on average, expected profit of 75 cents a share, according to Reuters Estimates. Per-share results were helped by lower shares outstanding in the latest period as Home Depot bought back stock. Total sales rose 11.3 percent to $23.1 billion, falling short of analysts' average estimate of $23.3 billion. Sales at stores open at least a year, an important retail measure, fell 5.1 percent. "Home Depot is in a very challenging position," Credit Suisse analyst Gary Balter said in a research note, adding that results point to lower customer traffic. Home Depot, which is competing fiercely for consumer dollars with smaller rival Lowe's Cos. ( LOW.N ), said a slowing U.S. economy, declining home sales and falling home prices hurt its retail division, where total sales rose just 1.1 percent to $19.7 billion. Other key metrics weakened. The average purchase fell 1 percent to $58.33, the first decline in four years, while average weekly sales per store fell 7 percent. Home Depot cited softness in most departments and said consumers were taking on fewer costly improvements such as kitchen renovations and flooring projects. In the Home Depot Supply segment that caters to home builders and other contractors, sales more than doubled to $3.5 billion, helped by acquisitions. HOME SALES WEAKEN Atlanta-based Home Depot and Lowe's have both cut their outlook this year as higher borrowing costs and weaker U.S. home sales cooled big-ticket purchases. In September, existing home sales slowed for the sixth straight month, and new home sales were off 14 percent from year-earlier levels, according to government and housing industry reports. Home Depot said per-share profit could fall as much as 16 percent in the fourth quarter. As Lowe's enters big U.S. cities, Home Depot has invested in new products, technology and service to defend its market share, including plans to spend $350 million in the second half of this year to add staff and improve store appearance. "It appears that the company is aware of its shortcomings on the retail side," said Peter Jankovskis, director of research at Oakbrook Investments in Lisle, Illinois. Home Depot pared its growth forecast, saying it now expects per-share profit to rise 4 percent to 5 percent for the current fiscal year, while sales would increase about 12 percent. The company had previously said full-year results would come in at the low end of projections of a 10 percent to 14 percent increase in per-share earnings and a 14 percent to 17 percent rise in sales. Home Depot shares eased 38 cents to $36.02 on the New York Stock Exchange, while Lowe's was off 2 cents at $28.98. Analyst had largely expected the weaker quarterly results. Home Depot's stock has fallen about 11 percent this year, while Lowe's is off 13 percent.