Julius Randle, now paired with Anthony Davis, wants 'this to be home'
The New Orleans Pelicans didn't waste any time once Julius Randle hit the market. 

The 23-year-old went into the summer as a restricted free agent with the Los Angeles Lakers, but they renounced his rights on July 2 once it became clear he would see a reduced role with LeBron James' arrival in Los Angeles.

That's when New Orleans started working the phones.

Randle talked to Pelicans general manager Dell Demps, a few members of the coaching staff and even spoke with star forward Anthony Davis about his potential fit with the team.

Davis was so emphatic about getting his fellow Kentucky Wildcat to the Big Easy he called him back three more times to make sure the deal got done.
Just a few hours after becoming an unrestricted free agent, Randle agreed to a two-year, $18 million deal with New Orleans even before former Pelicans center DeMarcus Cousins announced his intentions to sign with the Golden State Warriors.

"He's always been a guy we've targeted," Demps said on Friday (July 13). "As soon as he came available, we jumped on it as fast as we could."

Big men with Randle's level of talent rarely hit the open market so early in their careers. Once he did, the opportunity to play with Davis was difficult for Randle to pass up, especially after the All-Star Davis made it clear how badly he wanted him on the team.

"For him to see me fitting well into that plan and a part of that future means a lot," Randle said. "I'll be out there on the front line with him every game. You're not going to have to worry about me bringing my hard hat."

By signing Randle, who averaged 15.8 points and eight rebounds in his fourth season with the Lakers, the Pelicans made the splash they needed to soften what could have been a devastating blow when Cousins, even with his ruptured Achilles tendon, chose to join the Warriors. 

After making a run to the Western Conference semifinals last season, any sort of step back would be viewed as a massive failure for a franchise hoping to sign Davis to a five-year max extension worth roughly $230 million next summer.
Those negotiations will play a factor in almost every move Demps makes over the next year, and landing a player of Randle's caliber was essential to prevent the Pelicans' summer from looking like a disaster.

For Randle, it was important for him to land with a team that would allow him to show off the best parts of his game.

The 6-foot-9, 250-pound forward will be able to opt out of the second year of his deal and re-enter the market during what's expected to be a much more friendly market in the summer of 2019.

One of the teams expected to have available cap space next offseason will be New Orleans and both sides have a chance to spend the next year auditioning for a potential long-term union.

"For me, this is not about this season or next," Randle said. "I want this to be home and this to be a long-term thing. I feel like this is a group where guys are young and energetic and they can grow together."

The Pelicans were aiming to build a future around the transcendent big-man duo of Davis and Cousins this time last year, but their desire to construct the league's mightiest frontcourt didn't die with Cousins' departure.

New Orleans will add Randle to a group that already boasts Davis and sharpshooter Nikola Mirotic.

Davis and Mirotic proved to be a spectacular pairing in last year's playoffs. Bringing Randle into the mix will only make them more formidable.
If they can get the new three-man frontcourt rotation to function, New Orleans' strategy could keep the team relevant in a stacked Western Conference race.

"Each of them do a little bit something different, but I think their games all enhance each other," Demps said. "That's really the vision we had."

Cousins averaged a whopping 5.4 assists per game before his injury, and Randle will be responsible for creating offense the same way Cousins did as a big man in coach Alvin Gentry's system. In fact, his role may be even more expanded with point guard Rajon Rondo also leaving New Orleans this offseason to go to the Lakers.

The Pelicans replaced him with Gretna native Elfrid Payton, but he doesn't create shots the same way Rondo did when he was at his best.

Randle's ability to adapt to his new role will go a long way in determining just how quickly the Pelicans can get back to deploying one of the deadliest offensive attacks in the league.

"I like playing unselfish, I like seeing my teammates make shots before I make shots," the big man said.

The pressure is on for everyone involved to make the marriage between Randle and the Pelicans work, and both sides understand their futures will be much more secure if they can work things out in 2018-19.
