Super Smash Bros. Ultimate Roster Has All Previous Characters; Here's Every One
Everyone is here. The impossible is possible.
Last updated by Edmond Tran on June 19, 2018 at 4:49PM
Nintendo's upcoming Super Smash Bros. game, Super Smash Bros. Ultimate for Nintendo Switch, was finally revealed during the company's E3 2018 Direct presentation. As the company began to rattle off the roster of playable characters, there was one thing that slowly became increasingly clear: Everyone is here.
Every single character who has ever appeared in a Super Smash Bros. game--from the original 12 characters featured in the Nintendo 64 title, all the way up to the latest DLC characters made and released for Super Smash Bros. on Wii U--will be included as a playable character in Super Smash Bros. Ultimate.
This, of course, includes characters who originate from non-Nintendo series, like Snake from the Metal Gear Solid series and Cloud from Final Fantasy VII, as well as characters that have only appeared once before, like Young Link, Pichu, and Star Wolf.
All characters will undergo some mechanical changes and balances--some significant, some minor. For example, Link's bombs can now be remotely detonated. Generally speaking, all Final Smash moves will have more immediate effects--those who previously had long-lasting transformations like Bowser and Little Mac will have harder hitting versions, but they won't last as long. Some characters will have cosmetic adjustments--the Wii Sports Trainer will have a new face, for whatever reason.
Super Smash Bros. Ultimate will also feature two new characters: Inking Girl (or Boy) from the Splatoon series and Ridley, the archenemy of Samus Aran from the Metroid series. While the new game's roster will not include everyone from the outset--Nintendo teased the starting lineup may be as small as that of original N64 game--Nintendo is hoping to reward players by unlocking characters frequently, giving them a feeling of constant progression.
Here's a list of all the confirmed characters, in alphabetical order:
Bayonetta
Bowser
Bowser Jr.
Captain Falcon
Charizard
Cloud
Corrin
Dark Pit
Diddy Kong
Donkey Kong
Dr. Mario
Duck Hunt
Falco
Fox
Ganondorf
Greninja
Ice Climbers
Ike
Inkling
Ivysaur
Jigglypuff
King Dedede
Kirby
Link
Little Mac
Lucario
Lucas
Lucina
Luigi
Mario
Marth
Mega Man
Meta Knight
Mewtwo
Mii Brawler
Mii Gunner
Mii Swordfighter
Mr. Game & Watch
Ness
Olimar
Pac-Man
Palutena
Peach
Pichu
Pikachu
Pit
Pokemon Trainer
Ridley
R.O.B.
Robin
Rosalina & Luma
Roy
Ryu
Samus
Sheik
Shulk
Snake
Sonic
Squirtle
Toon Link
Villager
Wario
Wii Fit Trainer
Wolf
Yoshi
Young Link
Super Smash Bros. Ultimate will be released on December 7, 2018. It will also support GameCube controllers and every previous Super Smash Bros. Amiibo.