Fortnite Guide: Where The Risky Reels Treasure Map Is (Season 5, Week 1 Challenges)
Treasure ahoy!
Last updated by Tamoor Hussain on July 14, 2018 at 4:57AM
Fortnite Season 5 has begun and with it comes the first batch of challenges for players to undertake. This time around however, things are going to work a little differently. Challenges are split into two sections for Season 5: Free and Battle Pass. The former is made up of three challenges, while those who purchase the Battle Pass will have access to seven in total--including one that asks you to follow the treasure map found in Risky Reels. Here's where to find that, and complete everything else.
The treasure map hunt is easily the trickiest of the bunch. Luckily for you, we've done it and can help guide you through it. As with last season's instances of this challenge, you can explore Risky Reels to locate the treasure map, or you can simply head to where the treasure is--if you know where to go. In order to find the treasure, head to the tunnel south of Tomato Town, then climb on top of the northern entrance to find the Battle Pass icon. Take a look at the images below to see how it's done.
For the most part, Week 1 of challenges for the new season shouldn't be too tricky. In the free section it's all about dealing damage and taking out opponents using weapons including the SMG, the Stink Bomb, and grenade. On top of that, you'll have to search a Supply Llama--all fairly straightforward stuff, provided you've got the skills to pay the bills.
Outside of the treasure map, the Battle Pass section gets a little trickier, as you'll have to do some exploration. In order to complete those challenges you'll need to head to Snobby Shores and seek out seven chests, which you should be able to spot pretty easily provided you spend enough time there. On top of that you're going to have to search seven floating Lightning Bolts and take down three opponents in Retail Row. The Lightning Bolts can be collected like a Battle Star, but you'll need to build your way up to them to get your hands on them.
Free
Deal damage with SMGs to opponents (500) -- 5 Battle Stars
Search a Supply Llama (1) -- 5 Battle Stars
Clinger, Stink Bomb, or Grenade Eliminations (3) -- 10 Battle Stars
Battle Pass
Search chests in Snobby Shores (7) -- 5 Battle Stars
Search floating Lightning Bolts (7) -- 5 Battle Stars
Follow the treasure map found in Risky Reels (1) -- 10 Battle Stars
Eliminate opponents in Retail Row (3) -- 10 Battle Stars
Fortnite's Season 5 update is packed with new content and changes to the game. To get a good grasp of everything that's going on with it, take a look at the full Fortnite Season 5 patch notes.