Shojo-tachi wa Koya o Mezasu Anime's TV Ad Previews Cast's Ending Song
posted on 2015-12-26 14:30 UTC-8 by Egan Loo

Uguisu Yuki also highlighted from anime premiering on January 7

The official website for the television anime of MinatoSoft's Shojo-tachi wa Koya o Mezasu 
(Girls aim for the Wilderness: Girls beyond the youth KOYA) game began streaming 
a TV ad for the anime on Friday. 
The ad highlights the character Uguisu Yuki (voiced by Satomi Satou). 
The video also previews the ending theme song 
"Sekai wa Kyo mo Atarashii" (???????????) by Haruka Chisuga, Kana Hanazawa, Satomi Akesaka, and Satomi Satou.

The anime will premiere on January 7 at 10:30 p.m. on Tokyo MX, 
before it airs on MBS, BS11, and AT-X.

Takuya Sato (Selector Infected Wixoss, Steins;Gate, Mission-E) is directing the anime at project No.9, 
with scripts by Yuniko Ayana (Bakuman., Hori-san to Miyamura-kun, Kinmoza! Kiniro + Mosaic), 
based on the game's original scenario by Romeo Tanaka. 
Takayuki Noguchi (Queen's Blade 2: The Evil Eye, Ro-Kyu-Bu!, Papillon Rose) 
is adapting the character design for animation, 
based on Matsuryu's original character designs for the game. 
Takahiro (Akame ga KILL!, Yuki Yuna Is a Hero) is planning the project. 
The voice actresses for Sayuki (Haruka Chisuga), Yuka (Kana Hanazawa), 
Teruha (Satomi Akesaka), and Uguisu (Satomi Satou) are performing the ending theme song 
"Sekai wa Kyo mo Atarashii" (The World is New Again Today).

In the story, Buntaro is a student who wants to be something, but doesn't know what. 
One day his female classmate Sayuki announces she is working on a bishojo (pretty girl) game. 
Sayuki scouted him because he wrote a good script for drama club, 
but Buntaro doesn't know anything about bishojo games.

The cast are reprising their roles from the game:
Seiichiro Yamashita as Buntaro Hojo
Haruka Chisuga as Sayuki Kuroda
Kana Hanazawa as Yuka Kobayakawa
Satomi Akesaka as Teruha Ando
Satomi Satou as Uguisu Yuki
Toshiyuki Toyonaga as Atomu Kai

The first print bonus of the game's "Anime Edition" will also include a Blu-ray Disc with an original video anime. 
The "youth adventure" game is slated to ship on March 25.

MinatoSoft first announced the game collaboration in 2013, 
then unveiled details in 2014 as the first of four titles in its "Takahiro IV" project. 
The other titles were the Akame ga KILL! anime based on Takahiro's manga, 
the Washio Sumi wa Yusha de Aru. novel written by Takahiro and illustrated by BUNBUN, 
and the Yuki Yuna Is a Hero (Yuki Yuna wa Yusha de Aru.) anime planned by Takahiro. 
MinatoSoft opened a teaser site for Shojo-tachi wa Koya o Mezasu in August.
