
The Saudis couldnt do it without us: the UKs true role in Yemens deadly war
Britain does not merely supply the bombs that fall on Yemen  it provides the personnel and expertise that keep the war going. But is the government breaking the law? 
By  Arron Merat


Tue 18 Jun 2019 06.00BST


Last modified on Tue 18 Jun 2019 11.52BST


For more than four years, a brutal Saudi air campaign has bombarded Yemen, killing tens of thousands, injuring hundreds of thousands and displacing millions  creating the worlds worst humanitarian crisis. And British weapons are doing much of the killing. Every day Yemen is hit by British bombs  dropped by British planes that are flown by British-trained pilots and maintained and prepared inside Saudi Arabia by thousands of British contractors.
The Saudi-led military coalition, which includes the UAE, Bahrain and Kuwait, has targeted civilians  in a widespread and systematic manner, according to the UN  dropping bombs on hospitals, schools, weddings, funerals and even camps for displaced people fleeing the bombing.
Saudi Arabia has in effect contracted out vital parts of its war against Yemens Houthi movement to the US and the UK. Britain does not merely supply weapons for this war: it provides the personnel and expertise required to keep the war going. The British government has deployed RAF personnel to work as engineers, and to train Saudi pilots and targeteers  while an even larger role is played by BAE Systems, Britains biggest arms company, which the government has subcontracted to provide weapons, maintenance and engineers inside Saudi Arabia.
The Saudi bosses absolutely depend on BAE Systems, John Deverell, a former MoD mandarin and defence attache to Saudi Arabia and Yemen, told me. They couldnt do it without us. A BAE employee recently put it more plainly to Channel 4s Dispatches: If we werent there, in seven to 14 days there wouldnt be a jet in the sky.
The British bombs that rain down on Yemen are produced in three towns: Glenrothes in Scotland, and Harlow and Stevenage in south-east England. Bombs roll off production lines owned by Raytheon UK and BAE Systems, firms contracted by the government to manufacture Paveway bombs (22,000 apiece), Brimstone bombs (105,000 apiece), and Storm Shadow cruise missiles (790,000 apiece) for the Saudi Royal Air Force. BAE, under government contract, also assembles the jets that drop these bombs in hangars just outside the village of Warton, Lancashire.
Once these weapons arrive in Saudi Arabia, Britains involvement is far from over. The Saudi military lacks the expertise to use these weapons to fight a sustained air war  so BAE, under another contract to the UK government, provides what are known as in-country services. In practice, this means that around 6,300 British contractors are stationed at forward operating bases in Saudi Arabia. There, they train Saudi pilots and conduct essential maintenance night and day on planes worn out from flying thousands of miles across the Saudi desert to their targets in Yemen. They also supervise Saudi soldiers to load bombs on to planes and set their fuses for their intended targets.
Around 80 serving RAF personnel work inside Saudi Arabia. Sometimes they work for BAE to assist in maintaining and preparing aircraft. At other times they work as auditors to ensure that BAE is fulfilling its Ministry of Defence contracts. Additional RAF liaison officers work inside the command-and-control centre, from 