More loons land in NYC
Make way for more loons, New York City!
A majestic, 10-pound interloper with a piercing beak came ashore on Van Brunt Street in Red Hook, Brooklyn last week — the second common loon rescued in the city in two weeks.
“That is not characteristic of loons,” said Rita McMahon, director of the Wild Bird Fund, a nonprofit wildlife rescue group. “They’re probably sick,” McMahon added. “One couldn’t fly. The second one seems much more robust.”
It’s not unusual to catch a glimpse of a common or red throated loon in the city during the winter, especially when there’s snow on the ground, but the birds migrate north to breed, and the five boroughs are outside of their breeding zone.
After running tests, including lung and liver biopsies on one of the loons — which was rescued on Staten Island and nicknamed Steeze — the staff at the Wild Bird Fund determined he has kidney disease. Birds can get that from swimming and eating fish in contaminated waterways.
For now, the other loon’s health status remains a mystery. “He’s quite beautiful,” McMahon said of the second bird, named Lieutenant. “But something is probably not right.”
“It’s conceivable that these loons have some sort of neurological compromise caused by lead or mercury, which could cause them to not migrate or to come ashore in this unexpected way,” explained Gabriel Willow, an educator and naturalist with New York City Audubon, which works to protect the city’s wildlife.
Barring illness or old age, Willow isn’t sure why the loons would buck their typical spring migratory pattern.
“They nest as nearby as upstate New York,” Willow said. “Sometimes ‘bachelor’ or ‘bachelorette’ birds, perhaps yearling individuals, stick around on their ocean wintering grounds and don't migrate to lakes to breed,” he added.
Inside the Wild Bird Fund’s cramped office near Central Park, birds with webbed-feet slide across the floor and a rooster crows. Nearby, so-called “fancy pigeons” nuzzle one another and preen in the front window.
The Wild Bird Fund rescued 6,800 birds in the city last year, including kestrel and peregrine Falcons, red-tailed hawks and sparrows, McMahon said. Most of the birds are brought to the wildlife rescue service by laypeople.
McMahon estimated that 3,000 of those rescues were pigeons.
“I know people think pigeons have a bad rap,” she said. “You don’t know how many people are devoted to these birds. They are very smart. They are fabulous birds. People who know birds think a lot of pigeons.”
Once the fowl have been treated and nursed back to health, McMahon and her staff release them. A volunteer has already offered to take Lieutenant on a road trip to Maine once he’s fit for travel.
If Lieutenant or Steeze don’t get strong enough to survive in the wild or can’t fly, there’s a possibility that they could live out their lives in an animal sanctuary. Still, McMahon acknowledged, large birds aren’t always happy in educational settings.
Lieutenant seems like he’s on the right track, sleek and strong, he splashed in his tank and dove for goldish.
“Oh, God, are you lucky,” McMahon said, as Lieutenant interrupted her with a haunting call from his perch.
“Wasn’t that lovely?” she asked.