New York-based company wants to keep e-scooters off city sidewalks
A New York-based company wants to solve a big issue other cities have had with electric scooter companies: keeping the two-wheelers from littering public sidewalks.

Charge, which operates out of Long Island City, hopes to set up charging docks for electric scooters and bicycles in parking garages and large pedestrian plazas, like the ones around Penn Station.

The company doesn’t sell any scooters — only the infrastructure required to charge them. It plans to cut deals with scooter companies like Lime and Uber-owned Bird, which currently employ contractors to scoop up and charge their equipment.

Charge has joined an army of “micromobility” lobbyists who are pushing lawmakers in Albany to approve a bill to let municipalities decide whether or not to permit electric scooters and bikes on their streets.

Gov. Cuomo included language to give the green light to scooter companies in his budget proposal earlier this year, but it was taken out after Manhattan representatives raised concerns over the impact on the borough’s public spaces.

[More New York] Two die after Belt Parkway crash in Queens »
“We don’t think that NYC has the ample sidewalk space to properly do this,” said Charge CEO Andrew Fox. “There are still pedestrians on sidewalks who deserve the right not to have to climb over things. That’s what we’re seeing in California right now, a tremendous amount of micro-mobility devices littering the streets.”
New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy last week signed legislation legalizing e-bikes and scooters with some speed limit restrictions.

Charge is currently gearing up to launch in Los Angeles, Atlanta and a handful of other markets where electric scooter sharing is sanctioned.

[More New York] Rent Guidelines Board hikes rent on stabilized apartments for third straight year at raucous meeting »
Lime, one of the biggest players in the electric scooter sharing market, has stated publicly its equipment should be dockless, putting their program at odds with Charge’s proposition. But Lime’s strategy — leveraging a network of freelancers dubbed “Juicers” to charge their scooters — comes with safety concerns. Many of those workers charge the scooters at home, not in regulated facilities.

Fox says Charge hired formed FDNY Commissioner Sal Cassano to consult on safety measures to prevent fire hazards at charging stations. The company has secured more than 300 locations across the city to set up its chargers, but is now waiting for lawmakers to act.

State Sen. Jessica Ramos (D-Queens) last month proposed new legislation to legalize electric scooters and bikes, but has been hit with the same kind of pushback that Cuomo’s proposal received earlier in the year.
A Welsh mother will spend the next 28 months behind bars after she drunkenly slept on her 4-week-old son.

Marina Tilby received the sentence after admitting she was guilty of child neglect.

On March 31, 2017, the 26-year-old Tilby took her baby boy, Darian, along with her sister for a night of clubbing. During the evening, she was spotted repeatedly tossing her son in the air. Later, she went to a stranger’s trailer with three men she had just met and apparently fell asleep.

Some time later, Tilby’s sister found the boy unresponsive lying next to his mom with blood in his nose.

Tilby was so plastered she was unable to be awakened by the sister, who was also in the trailer, reported the Mirror.

[More News] Total solar eclipse will wow South America next week »
Darian died at a nearby hospital.

On Friday, judge Paul Thomas called the deadly incident a “dreadful case of maternal selfishness” and criticized Tilby for her “deliberate neglect.”

Although prosecutor Catherine Richards said Tilby drunkenly fell asleep on top of her child, forensic evidence couldn’t prove her rolling on top of him contributed to his death.

[More News] More than 500 Wayfair workers favor walkout to protest mattress sales to kiddie migrant detention centers »
Defense attorney Dyfed Thomas tried to paint a sympathetic image of his client as a grieving mother who had already suffered enough.

“(Tilby) took a catastrophic set of actions in deciding to go out that night and continuing to drink," said Thomas. "She wishes to express to the court, the baby’s father and her own family her own remorse and feeling of guilt from that night. Her grief will fill her for the absence of her child for the rest of her days.”

Thomas also claimed Tilby, who wasn’t involved with Darian’s dad, was suffering from depression since the child’s death and had “clearly suffered.”

[More News] Prominent Virginia doctor and tour guide murdered in Belize »
But the unmoved judge slammed Tilby for not protecting her son.

“It is the mother’s responsibility, a mother’s duty and her natural instinct to put the care and safety of her 4-week-old child above all else," boomed the judge. "You completely ignored that duty so you could get extremely drunk on a night out.”