
Slovakia's liberal president makes first visit to outspoken Czech counterpart
Zuzana aputovs arrival in Prague comes as activists plan fresh protests against nationalist Czech government

Robert Tait in Prague


Thu 20 Jun 2019 15.02BST


First published on Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.10BST


Slovakias newly installed liberal president, Zuzana aputov, has arrived in the Czech Republic on an official visit that will culminate in a symbolic visit to the grave of Vclav Havel, the former dissident who was the first post-communist leader of the former Czechoslovakia.
aputov was due to lay flowers at the Havel family plot in Pragues Vinohrady cemetery in a mark of respect to a man she has identified as a role model and a statement of her own self-avowed values of tolerance and decency. Havel led the protests that resulted in the fall of the communist regime in the 1989 Velvet Revolution.
The wreath-laying event came after she was greeted at Prague castle by Milo Zeman, the populist Czech president whose controversially outspoken views are seen as the polar opposite of what his new Slovak counterpart represents.
The two leaders exchanged friendly words but appeared ill at ease as a brass band played during a welcome ceremony, attended by senior Czech politicians and other dignitaries.
There were fears beforehand that the meeting might be marred by Zemans penchant for politically insensitive and sometimes sexist remarks.
The visit followed a convention established after the 1993 dissolution of Czechoslovakia into the separate states of the Czech Republic and Slovakia that the presidents of each country should call on the other as their first trip abroad.
But the visit of aputov, five days after her inauguration last Saturday, carried added piquancy because her political outlook is so at odds with Zemans. It also came as liberal activists were preparing to stage what they promise will be the biggest protest rally yet this Sunday against Andrej Babi, the Czech prime minister and Zemans political ally who has faced a series of demonstrations demanding his resignation over perceived corruption and conflicts of interest.
aputov was not scheduled to meet Babi, who was in Brussels for a European council meeting.
By visiting the grave of Havel, however, she appeared to be drawing explicit attention to the contrast between current Czech politics and her election in March, which followed a wave of popular protests in Slovakia over the murder last year of Jn Kuciak, a journalist who was investigating corruption, and his fiancee.
Analysts and political activists say aputov  a lawyer who came to public attention by successfully leading the fight against an illegal landfill site in Slovakia  is seen as a ray of hope by many Czechs, who despair at the state of local politics but bemoan a lack of alternatives.
Its an inspiration for us to see that in Slovakia civil society can work to create not just a new party but to win a presidential election, said Benjamin Roll, deputy leader of the Million Moments for Democracy movement that has organised the anti-Babi rallies. There was a lot of sadness last year that Milo Zeman was reelected despite all he had done. Now these people look at Slovakia and see some hope that we can find someone like aputov in the next presidential election.
Ji Pehe, director of New York University in Prague and a Czech political analyst, said many Czech people were projecting their political aspirations on to aputov. I see a lot of 