Mets’ pitchers cap off terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day by letting four different Phillies go yard on them
PHILADELPHIA – With the dark cloud of disorder and chaos once again surrounding the Mets, the team desperately needed to prove it could do one thing right: win. Instead, the Mets played the kind of baseball that’s best watched by closing one’s eyes.

The Phillies entered the series having been swept by the Marlins, perpetuating a free fall that had included seven consecutive losses. All it took for the Phillies to get their groove back was facing a beleaguered Mets pitching staff. Jean Segura, Rhys Hoskins, Maikel Franco and Jay Bruce — yes, the same Jay Bruce who spent three years as a Met — all homered against New York on Monday, handing the Mets’ a brutal 13-7 loss at Citizens Bank Park.

Mickey Callaway needs two press conferences to apologize for his temper tantrum »
Steven Matz’s first-inning struggles continued when he gave up home runs to Jean Segura and Rhys Hoskins to give the Phillies a 2-1 lead. The left-hander has issued 10 home runs in the first inning this season and 18 overall. Matz was pulled from the game after 4.1 innings having given up seven earned runs on three hits (three home runs) with three walks and one strikeout over 81 pitches.
"I just left the ball up in the zone today and they made me pay,” Matz said. “I didn’t have my best stuff coming out of the gates. Those are the days you have to grind. I just wasn’t able to get it done.”

The Mets’ loss was also infused with defensive miscues. A large part of those mishaps were expected when the Mets put a natural first baseman (Dom Smith) in left field and a second baseman (Jeff McNeil) in right field. A slower and less agile Robinson Cano couldn’t get a grip on balls at second base and the 36-year-old lowered his batting average to .223 after going 0-for-5.

The Mets have been forced to get creative with their outfield due to Brandon Nimmo’s prolonged absence because of a bulging disc in his neck. The Mets have said they are willing to sacrifice defensive strength if it means their lineup will improve. The revised plan came back to bite the team on Monday when McNeil miscalculated a fly ball in right and it sailed over his head. Smith looked sloppy in left field, too.

“These guys haven’t been out there a ton of time. For the most part, they’ve done a good job,” Mets manager Mickey Callaway said on his outfielders in Smith and McNeil. “A couple miscues here and there are what we have to live with to score seven runs. It’s part of it, we just have to pitch better.”