Kirin J Callinan on stunts, exhibitionism and being misunderstood: ‘Is this who I want to be?’
After having all his equipment stolen in the US last month, Kirin J Callinan printed up some new merchandise as a fundraiser. One T-shirt reads: “What part of Kirin J Callinan don’t you understand?”

“Every part,” he confirms dryly to Guardian Australia.

The Sydney musician has had “a contradictory and confusing year of mistakes, exaggeration and misrepresentations” – that’s what it says in the press release for his third solo album, Return to Center. But today he’s committed to clearing a few things up in the name of transparency – an unusual step for an artist assumed to be rooted in provocation and parody.

Events kicked off in November 2017, when Callinan lifted his kilt to photographers at the Aria awards in Sydney, and subsequently received a good behaviour bond after pleading guilty to obscene and wilful exposure. His referees for the case included Jimmy Barnes, director Jane Campion and Neil Finn, who described him as “as a person with a penchant for mischief and exhibitionism”.


Singer Kirin J Callinan pleads guilty to obscene exposure at Arias
 Read more
(“It’s true, I did shoot fairly high with my referees,” Callinan says now.)

Finn wasn’t wrong; the exhibitionism wasn’t exactly out of character. Callinan’s penis, or at times just the fluids that emerge from it – has made cameos on his Instagram account, in the video of SAD and on the gatefold of the vinyl of his second album, 2017’s Bravado. But when the exposure moved from the artist’s own domain to a red carpet surprise, it raised questions – and concerns – around consent.

Further criticism blew up around that gatefold sleeve, in which he was photographed painted bronze – “like a bodybuilder homage, the idea of vanity,” he says now. But in the context of recent and overdue discourse about blackface (as well as consent), to many it seemed Callinan was unforgivably thumbing his nose. Opinion pieces by Australian cultural commentators followed, and his appearances at touring festival Laneway were cancelled – partly at the urging of Miss Blanks, rapper and ambassador of the festival’s safe space initiative.

 Kirin J Callinan in a kilt at the Arias
Facebook Twitter Pinterest  Kirin J Callinan arrives at the Aria awards in 2017. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP
In fact, in Australia, he seemed to be cancelled in general.

At the time, Callinan followed advice to pipe down and let the conversation happen around him, but he’s now using Return to Center – an album of cover versions – to belatedly explain himself. “It was also a very good way for me to look at myself and look at my behaviour and think, ‘Is this who I want to be?’” he says.

The album opens with Life Is Life – the Laibach version, not the Opus original. This is significant because Laibach, a Slovenian avant-garde group formed in 1980, perform absurd pomp-rock straight-faced and employ deeply controversial imagery. Often, their intentions are confusing.

Similarly, Callinan is of the opinion that “art should be amoral and a conversation starter, if nothing else”. When asked if he has a leave-it-to-the-gods attitude with some of his performance-art stunts, he replies, “Yeah, exactly that. And it’s both liberating and anxiety-inducing. You suffer the consequences.”

 It was easier, as a performer in the age of social media, to betray my own intelligence for a cheap ‘like’ ... It came back to bite me
He addresses those consequences head-on with some of his song choices. A cover of Rise, by Public Image Limited (originally written about apartheid in South Africa), is introduced by actors reading out news reports such as: “An error of judgement, a Sydney court’s been told. That’s what prompted a Sydney musician to flash himself on the Arias red carpet.” Then come the lyrics of the first verse: “I could be wrong, I could be right” and – oh dear – “I could be black, I could be white …”

Then there’s The Homosexual, by Momus, which seems to address criticism that Callinan’s flirtation with cross-dressing and queer imagery is purely to titillate. His aesthetic has pinballed from homoerotic cowboy, to a John Waters pencil-moustache and floral tops, to high-waisted pants and 80s pastels – although most recently he’s been toying with a chainmail coif.


Sign up for the Sleeve Notes email: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras
 Read more
To this, he says, “I’ve been dressing very flamboyantly since I was a teenager and was called a faggot growing up, got beaten up. The idea of being non-binary or fluid wasn’t an option that existed to me, but I’m sure if I was 10 years younger I probably would identify as that.”

Callinan grew up in the Northern Beaches of Sydney, though his vibe is more Newtown meets Snowtown. His father was a founding member of the Radiators, and Callinan’s own band comprises his brothers, known as Tex Crick and Mahne Frame, with guest artists.

He now lives in Highland Park, northeast Los Angeles. The American media has been fairly immune to the controversy in Australia (although Spin did ask “Is his brand of provocation the most interesting thing in underground music, or just nonsense?” before settling favourably), preferring to focus on the fact that Callinan audaciously took advantage of US chain store Guitar Center’s return policy to record the album entirely with free equipment. He even “borrowed” the company’s branding for the album artwork.

 Kirin J Callinan
Facebook Twitter Pinterest
 ‘The idea of being non-binary or fluid wasn’t an option that existed to me [growing up], but I’m sure if I was 10 years younger I probably would identify as that.’ Photograph: Yana Yatsuk
“If anything, I’m celebrating with them,” he says, trying on that idea like a new coif. “It would be the ultimate ‘return to center’ if they see it that way and stock my record and I do in-store performances. Or they’re going to sue me … and that wouldn’t be bad either, to be honest.”

As well as being a pun on Guitar Center’s returns policy, the album title refers to Callinan’s intention to tone down the bravado – which, he says, was a reaction to wearing his heart on his sleeve so much in his earlier years. Somehow that vulnerability morphed into playing an outrageous character, he says, without that really being the intention.

“It was easier, as a performer in the age of social media, to betray my own intelligence all the time for a cheap ‘like’ or two, playing into the vacuum a bit,” he says. “It came back to bite me, if I can speak candidly. I think some of the reactions that I’ve had on some moral or political grounds have largely come from people being annoyed by my obnoxiousness or my willingness to do dumb things without recourse, when they expected better from me. So when, if, I fucked up, I wasn’t given much grace or shown much mercy.”

In Australia, Callinan’s rather stuck between a rock and a hard place. Just as there are those early fans, he suspects, who feel let down by the art pranks he embarked on, there are more recent fans who will feel betrayed by words of contrition. It explains why he was so drawn to one more cover on the album, Robert Wyatt’s Signed Curtain, with its dispiriting acknowledgement that composing a song in order to connect can be a wasted effort.

“I found that so heartbreaking,” says Callinan, “the idea that I would be so hellbent on getting someone’s affection – or collective affection – that I would form a band and record this song and sing it with all my heart, only to admit that this is futile.”

But that, surely, is the essence of every songwriter, the desire to be understood.

“Totally,” he says. “But few admit their failings and Robert Wyatt just admits that, actually, this is all bullshit. I’m sorry.”