Nintendo Switch's E3 2018 Press Conference News - Super Smash Bros. Ultimate, Fortnite, Mario Party
Super Smash Bros, Metroid Prime 4, and who knows what else!
Last updated by Matt Espineli on June 16, 2018 at 2:14PM
After all the big announcements from the last few days, Nintendo wrapped up the E3 2018's string of press conferences with a bevy of new details about its latest games. The company went into great detail about the new Super Smash Bros. game. Titled Super Smash Bros. Ultimate, the game is shaping up to be one of the most exciting this year. There's also a plethora of new games that got announced.
To ensure you stay on top of everything, we've rounded up all of the announcements from the Direct Presentation. And if you'd like to re-experience the excitement of the reveals, be sure to jump into our Nintendo Direct liveblog.
Daemon X Machina
New Nintendo Switch Game Revealed At E3 2018: Daemon X Machina--Giant mechs battle it out for supremacy in this exciting new game for the Nintendo Switch.
Fire Emblem: Three Houses
New Nintendo Switch Fire Emblem Revealed At E3 2018--Fire Emblem: Three Houses was revealed today for Nintendo Switch.
Fornite: Battle Royale
Fortnite On Nintendo Switch Available Today--The surprise announcement may have leaked a little early, but the epic Battle Royale game on Switch is still big news.
Octopath Traveler
New Nintendo Switch Demo Coming For Square RPG Octopath Traveler--The big, beautiful Square Enix RPG is coming to Nintendo Switch soon, and a new demo is coming even sooner.
Pokemon Let's Go Pikachu/Eevee
Legendary Pokemon Mew Packaged Exclusive with Every Poke Ball Plus--Buying the Joy-Con accessory will get you the legendary rare Pokemon, the #151 psychic cat thing, Mew.
Super Mario Party
New Mario Party Revealed For Switch, And It's Super--Mario Party Super for Nintendo Switch introduces games that use multiple consoles in unique ways.
Super Smash Bros. Ultimate
Super Smash Ultimate On Switch Is An Entirely New Game--Nintendo's latest entry in the long-running franchise has been built from the ground up.
Super Smash Bros. Ultimate For Switch Will Have Every Previous Fighter--Every character who has ever appeared in a Super Smash Bros. game will be in Super Smash Bros. Ultimate for Nintendo Switch. Yes, even Snake.
Every Super Smash Bros. Ultimate Character Change Coming We Know Of (So Far)--The next Super Smash Bros. game is coming to Switch, and all characters ever are coming back, but not without some changes, here’s what we know so far.
GameCube Controllers Work In Super Smash Bros. Ultimate For Switch--Super Smash Bros. Ultimate will support a variety of controller styles, including the GameCube Controller.
Super Smash Bros. Ultimate Adds Metroid's Ridely--The latest character reveal for Super Smash Bros. expansive roster is the fan-requested antagonist of the Metroid series.
Xenoblade Chronicles 2 DLC
Nintendo Switch RPG Xenoblade Chronicles 2 Adds More Story--The next bit of DLC for the expansive Nintendo RPG has a release date set for September.