
A US war with Iran looms. Dont for one second think that it is justified


Wed 19 Jun 2019 13.31BST


Last modified on Wed 19 Jun 2019 19.09BST


We know how the story goes. The decision for war is made long in advance. That becomes the end point, and the evidence must be marshalled to achieve that goal. A long-lasting regime suddenly becomes an imminent threat. Exiles with minimal connections to their country of origin, but with fat bank balances, extensive links with rightwing thinktanks, multinational companies and western security services are wheeled out to solemnly declare that war must be waged on their homeland. A litany of never-ending human rights abuses is endlessly detailed: the sort ignored by our elites if they are committed by our allies, like the Saudi dictatorship, which has plunged Yemen into the worlds worst humanitarian crisis. Critics of war are demonised as stooges or useful idiots of an enemy that imperils national security and menaces its own people, and as haters of their own country.
While our Tory overlords committing to another military escapade is predictable, Trumps 'coalition' will extend further
It happened in Iraq, it happened in Libya, too: both countries were swiftly drowned in blood and chaos. In a just world, one might expect the cheerleaders of these catastrophes  which ended in the slaughter of hundreds of thousands, the maiming and traumatising of countless others, created millions of refugees and internally displaced persons, and turned both nations into playgrounds for violent extremists  to be driven from public life in disgrace. Instead they retain their influence  within the US administration (most strikingly in the form of John Bolton, Trumps national security adviser), within the leading echelons of the Conservative party, and within the commentariat. And, without shame but with much bloodlust, they set about building the case for a new war with Iran.
After Jeremy Corbyn suggested that the Trump administrations pronouncement of Iranian guilt over the tanker attacks needed to be scrutinised, and that Britain should act to ease tensions in the Gulf, he faced a barrage of denunciations. You see, you are more likely to be regarded as a respectable politician if you casually call for wars that will incinerate sleeping infants and annihilate wedding parties than if you call for de-escalation and peace. Never mind that EU foreign ministers echoed Corbyns position, demanding an independent UN investigation and more evidence. Corbyn was pathetic and predictable, pronounced flailing Conservative leadership candidate Jeremy Hunt, asking why Corbyn could never bring himself to back British allies, British intelligence or British interests. This is somewhat curious given the Labour leader had the same line as Britains European allies, and only the delusional or the wicked could imagine a new Middle Eastern conflagration amounts to backing British interests.
It is the comments of fellow flailing Tory leadership candidate Michael Gove that are particularly instructive: Corbyns comments on Iran show once again he is not fit to be trusted with our national security. Here is a man who called for the invasion of Iraq two days after 9/11 and who remains gruesomely supportive of it. According to Tory ex-chancellor Ken Clarke, with Gove as prime minister wed go to war with at least three countries at once.
This lust for war should frighten us because, while the likes of Gove will not become prime minister, the consensus among the Tory elite 