Warriors to effectively retire Kevin Durant’s number after three stellar seasons

The Warriors adopted a quality-over-quantity approach for the Kevin Durant era, and in keeping with that spirit following his departure for the Nets, Golden State announced Monday that it is effectively retiring his number.

“As long as I am Co-Chairman of this team,” Warriors majority owner and CEO Joe Lacob said in a statement, “no player will ever wear #35 for the Warriors again.”

Durant played just three seasons for Golden State after coming over as a free agent in 2016. However, the team experienced extraordinary success during that span, making the NBA Finals in all three seasons and winning two championships.
Durant was named Finals MVP for his efforts in leading the Warriors to those titles, and he earned all-star and first- or second-team all-NBA honors in each of his three seasons with Golden State. The 30-year-old forward was leading all players in postseason scoring this year when he suffered a calf injury during a second-round series against the Rockets, and he tore his Achilles’ tendon while making his return to the court in Game 5 of the Warriors’ Finals loss to the Raptors.
That injury makes it likely that Durant will miss the entire 2019-20 season, despite getting a reported four-year, $164 million contract from Brooklyn. The Achilles’ tear also exposed the Warriors as having little depth behind its superstar quartet of Durant, Stephen Curry, Klay Thompson and Draymond Green.

Golden State took criticism for clearing Durant to play in that Finals game, which the team won to extend the series.

His decision to return to action also sparked speculation that Durant was attempting to show his toughness and dedication to his Golden State teammates. Despite being heavily wooed by Warriors players while a free agent in 2016, the former Thunder star never seemed to fully mesh with a squad that had won an NBA title in 2015 and then set a record with 73 regular season wins just before he arrived.
Durant had a much-noted argument with Green during a November game against the Clippers. Green, who was reported to have raised the issue of Durant’s impending free agency as the incident unfolded, was suspended one game for conduct detrimental to the team.

Even after the Warriors won their second straight championship with Durant in 2018, tensions appeared to bubble to the surface. During the official celebration of that title, Golden State General Manager Bob Myers joked that Curry would get more preferential treatment than Durant in contract negotiations because the longer-tenured players had “earned it” by virtue of having “been here from the way-before days.”

That was a reference to the Warriors’ rise to enormous success before Durant came aboard, and the four-time scoring champion was reportedly taken aback by the widespread scorn he received for, as some saw it, jumping on Golden State’s bandwagon to put NBA titles on his resume.
Of the strained moments Durant appeared to experience in Golden State, a person close to him told the Undefeated it “showed a lack of respect for one of the greatest players to put that uniform on, and the fact that he took all that abuse and still put his career on the line to help them win.”

ESPN analyst Kendrick Perkins, a former teammate of Durant’s in Oklahoma City, told the website that the Warriors “were taking him for granted.” Perkins said that, because of that ongoing dynamic, Durant had “one foot out the door” this past season.

In his statement Monday, Lacob gave no indication that anything may have been amiss.

He referred to Durant’s individual and team success with Golden State, and the owner called him “a transformative NBA player and one of the best to ever play the game.” Lacob said Durant “carried himself with class and dignity both on and off the court” and that his “commitment to our community was evident each day.”
