
Adult performers picket Instagram HQ over company's nude photo rules
Artists, activists and models join in condemning confusing guidelines leading to account suspensions

Kari Paul in San Francisco


Wed 19 Jun 2019 20.06BST


First published on Wed 19 Jun 2019 11.00BST


Dozens of adult performers picketed outside of Instagrams Silicon Valley headquarters over guidelines about photos containing nudity. The inconsistency of the rules, they say, has led to hundreds of thousands of account suspensions and is imperiling their livelihoods.
Adult performers led the protest on Wednesday, but other users including artists, sex workers, queer activists, sex education platforms and models say they have been affected by the platforms opaque removal system. The action was organized by the Adult Performer Actors Guild, the largest labor union for the adult film industry.
Most users affected are not criticizing the platform for enforcing standards; instead, they complain that the Facebook-owned Instagram doesnt notify users which standards were violated and provides little direction about how to restore accounts.
Protestors dissolved the protest after meeting with Instagram officials, who promised to reinstate banned accounts and continue an ongoing dialogue with censored users in the future.
Its important for us to hear directly from people in the Instagram community, a spokeswoman from Instagram said.
As Instagram grows  the service now has more than one billion users and an influencer market of $1.7bn, expected to reach as high as $2.3bn by 2020  those types of decisions affect the livelihood of a growing number of users relying on the platform for booking work.
A totally unregulated, privately owned entity has tremendous control over artists lives
Amber Lynn, an American porn star based in Los Angeles, said her account was terminated without warning or explanation two months ago. She had more than 100,000 followers.
I sent [Instagram] multiple emails through my lawyer and they will still not tell me why they did it, she said. They do not answer you, do not give you an opportunity to correct any problems or even tell you what problems they had to begin with so you can avoid it in the future.
Lynn said she had been building her portfolio on the platform for five years, and lost it without warning. Videos and images she had shared of her brother, who has since passed away, are now gone forever, she said.
There was a lot of stuff that was not just content of me as a model and an actor but private, personal mementoes that were lost just because they can take it with the flick of a switch, she said. And Instagram doesnt care.
Adult performers on Instagram use the platform much like anyone else: to promote their work, share photos of friends and collaborators, and communicate with friends and fans. But the Adult Performers Actors Guild says Instagram has removed the accounts of more than 1,000 adult performers so far in 2019, most without explanation.
In a pair of letters in April, the group asked Facebook, Instagrams parent company, to provide more clarity for account terminations.
In the large majority of instances, there was no nudity shown in the pictures. However, it appears that the accounts were terminated merely because of their status as an adult performer, James Felton, the Adult Performers Actors Guild legal counsel, told the Guardian. Efforts to learn the reasons behind the termination have been futile, he added.
Felton said the Guild was considering taking a legal route pending the companys reply to 