First look inside the TWA Hotel at New York's JFK
#Travel
New York City (CNN) — A party in southern Queens, an hour outside of Manhattan, might not sound like the hottest event in town.
But when it's the opening day of the TWA Hotel at New York City's JFK airport, which took place May 15, it's the hospitality -- and aviation -- moment of the year. 
The ASEAN country that's the next business hub
How a fresh approach is taking the Thai business environment to the next level.
Models and dancers in 1960s attire mingled with aviation fans, architecture buffs and reporters -- some wearing "Mad Men"-inspired looks and retro aviation gear -- on the inaugural day of the much anticipated hotel, which is inside the former TWA air terminal designed by Eero Saarinen.
Family reunions
At 4 p.m. on the dot, when guests could officially begin checking in, one man, 23-year-old Dan Mickevic eagerly waited for his chance to get a bright red TWA-branded room key. But it wasn't just about taking in the funky mid-century modern surroundings or sampling the Intelligentsia coffee on offer in the lobby.
Mickevic's grandmother, who passed away in 2009, was a reservations agent for TWA for nearly two decades.
Aviation runs in the family. He now works on the JetBlue grounds crew at DCA Reagan National Airport and flew up from Washington, DC, for the day just for the opportunity to be one of the fortunate few to spend the opening night in the hotel.
"This is my way of honoring her," he said.
And Mickevic wasn't the only one with an emotional connection to TWA.
Several former flight attendants, some sporting their original uniforms, came to the hotel in order to get a long-awaited glimpse at the building that many of them had called home base.
TWA Airlines folded in 2001, and many employees were absorbed by American Airlines.
Deborah Doval, a New York City native, began working for TWA in 1976. She heard about the TWA Hotel opening through some of her fellow former flight attendants, who call themselves the Silver Wings. Many keep in touch on Facebook and email.
"It's very emotional," she told CNN Travel, her voice cracking slightly. "I never thought I'd get another opportunity [to come back]. It's been wonderful to meet other women and hear their stories. We're family."
Flying on solid ground
Many of the people visiting the TWA Hotel weren't there to spend the night.
One of the biggest draws was The Connie, aka an out-of-service Lockheed Constellation L-1649A Starliner propeller airplane that had been towed to New York and turned into a cocktail bar.
Visitors posed on the stairs leading into the plane, then on the reupholstered seats inside the cabin to sip Champagne and pose for photos. But the most popular vantage point by far was the cockpit, which has been opened up so travelers can see the controls and pretend to be a pilot.