Prince William and Kate Middleton named the new royal baby Prince Louis Arthur Charles — and no one saw it coming
Kate Middleton and Prince William named their third child Prince Louis Arthur Charles.
The name is a tribute to Lord Louis Mountbatten, Prince Philip's uncle, who was a British naval officer.
Both Prince William and Prince George have "Louis" in their full names.
After much speculation and wagering, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge have announced the name of their third child, a baby boy: Prince Louis Arthur Charles.
Kensington Palace announced the new baby's name and title, His Royal Highness Prince Louis of Cambridge, on Twitter on Friday morning.
The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge are delighted to announce that they have named their son Louis Arthur Charles.
Twitter Ads info and privacy
Born on Monday, April 23, Prince Louis made his debut on the steps of the Lindo Wing of St. Mary's Hospital in London.
"Louis" didn't top the lists of those betting on what the name would be with odds of around 20/1. A recent poll by MSN didn't provide "Louis" as an option to vote for. Even royal experts didn't see it coming.
But the choice actually isn't that surprising.
Both Prince William and his son Prince George have "Louis" in their full titles, so the name was hiding in plain sight.
Royals usually draw upon their family tree for naming inspiration, and Prince Louis is no exception. Prince William and Kate's newest addition is named after Lord Louis Mountbatten, a British naval officer with a royal connection.
Lord Louis Mountbatten was born in 1900 and assassinated in 1979,when members of the Provisional Irish Republican Army bombed his boat, according to Encyclopedia Britannica. Although he was not a member of the British royal family himself, he had ties to them. Lord Louis' great-grandmother was Queen Victoria, and as the BBC points out, he was uncle to Prince Philip.
Lord Louis' parents, Prince Louis of Battenberg and Princess Victoria of Hesse, were German royalty who relinquished their titles due to anti-German sentiment in the UK during World War I, changing "Battenberg" to "Mountbatten."
Prince Charles reportedly described his great uncle Louis as "the grandfather I never had," according to The Sun, which likely contributed to the decision to name his son, Prince William, "William Arthur Philip Louis."
The new baby's other names are familiar choices on the royal roster: "Arthur," also included in both Prince William's and Prince Charles' full title, is a royal tradition, and "Charles" is for Prince Charles.
Their two other kids also have names of special significance.
Prince George's full name also includes Louis: George Alexander Louis. "George" is for the Queen's father King George VI, and "Alexander" is for the Queen's middle name (Alexandra).
His younger sister's full name is Princess Charlotte Elizabeth Diana. "Charlotte" is a feminization of "Charles" for Prince Charles as well as Pippa Middleton's middle name, "Elizabeth" is after Queen Elizabeth, and "Diana" is in memory of Prince William's mother, Princess Diana.
These are names we'll be seeing a lot more of as the royal family grows up.