NBA free agency: Kawhi Leonard keeping Lakers, Clippers and Raptors waiting

The first day of NBA free agency saw 26 of our top 30 free agents agree to deals. Teams committed more than $3 billion to contracts. While things are moving fast, one big piece remains on the board: Kawhi Leonard.

Keep checking back: This story will update with the latest rumors, signings and deals.

Latest rumblings
Lakers and Clippers wait on Kawhi Leonard, possibly to their own peril (July 1): With most of the top-level free agents gone, and a lot of the second- and third-tier guys agreeing to deals as well, the Los Angeles teams are stuck watching their backup options dwindle if Leonard doesn’t sign with their franchise. The No. 1 free agent in this year’s class had a call with Magic Johnson, but as is his way, there is no insight into whether he’s California-bound or sticking with Toronto. Fellow free agent and Raptors/Spurs teammate Danny Green, who has drawn serious from Dallas and other teams, is reportedly waiting on Leonard’s decision before making his own. Seth Curry, a Lakers target, agreed to sign with the Mavericks on Monday.
Heat complete deal for Jimmy Butler (July 1): Miami’s sign-and-trade for Jimmy Butler had some hiccups, but the team finally completed it Monday as part of a four-team deal. To clear up the necessary space to absorb Butler’s new four-year, $142 million contract, the Heat will send mercurial center Hasaan Whiteside to the Trail Blazers and Josh Richardson to the 76ers (as expected Sunday night), according to ESPN. Meanwhile, the Blazers are sending forward Meyers Leonard to the Heat and forward Mo Harkless to the Clippers, who get the Heat’s 2023 first-round pick as part of their troubles for taking Harkless’s $11 million salary. Based on their high payroll, the Heat seemed like a long shot to land a star player at the start of free agency, but it figured out a way to get its man.
D’Angelo Russell going west to Golden State, but another trade could be coming (July 1): Though they lost Kevin Durant, the Warriors won’t leave empty-handed. ESPN reports Golden State and Brooklyn have agreed to a sign-and-trade that will have Russell going to the Warriors on a four-year deal worth $117 million. For now, at least. The New York Times says “it’s just a matter of when” Russell is dealt again. He can’t be dealt until December, but the Timberwolves have been frequently linked to Russell. As for the original Brooklyn-Golden State deal, Durant will be the “return” of that transaction, as he already announced at the start of free agency that he’s headed to Brooklyn. To make the trade work, ESPN reports, the Warriors are sending Andre Iguodala, who will turn 36 next season, to the Memphis Grizzlies with a future draft pick. He’s a buyout candidate, with the Rockets reportedly interested in signing him. The Athletic reported that Treveon Graham and Shabazz Napier — a pair of Nets reserves — are also headed to Golden State as part of the deal.
Top 30 free agents
The Washington Post’s 2019 NBA free agent rankings considered the following factors: age, health, team role, 2018-19 stats, contribution to winning, transferability of skills, off-court intangibles, postseason impact, anticipated earning power and projected production during the forthcoming contract period, among other factors.
