THE anonymous messages poured in daily. “Go kill yourself.” “You’re worthless.” At first Courtney Axford-Dando bottled it all up. She had been bullied since she was five years old. It began in the playground and classroom and then moved to social media. Her bullies would hurl abuse about the way she looked and behaved, and try to isolate her in school. Eventually, when she was 12, her family found out. In her school in Wales, teachers spotted the face-to-face bullying. But online, her tormentors continued after classes and, as most were anonymous, the school would not help. She spiralled into a depression that only years of counselling alleviated.Of all the forms of bullying, the online variety attracts the most attention these days. It is a big focus of the “Be Best” initiative launched by Melania Trump, America’s First Lady, to teach children the importance of social, emotional and physical health. Online platforms offer bullies ever more creative ways to persecute victims outside school hours. Cyber-bullying varies from private threats to cruel public comments to spreading sexually explicit material. Bullies might invite their target to a chat room or group conversation created for the sole purpose of hurling abuse at him or her. Conversely, exclusion from a popular group chat is the online equivalent of being picked last in gym class.Get our daily newsletterUpgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.Reports of teenagers bullied online and committing suicide naturally cause panic among parents and legislators. But cyber-bullying—continuing hurtful harassment—is in fact not as rampant as tabloid headlines suggest. Prevalence estimates vary depending on the definition used. One multi-country study found that the share of children reporting that they had been bullied online more than once a week ranged from 0.7% in Japan to 12.6% in Israel. A second study found that 27% of American children had endured bullying online; a third that 17% of British teenagers have been victims.Online, where posts can lead their own viral lives and everything leaves a trail, words can be eviscerating. Often the only defence victims have is to delete their online profiles entirely. But that means forgoing a way to interact with others in a positive way. Bullying happens where young people spend their time—at present, mainly Instagram, Snapchat, Facebook and WhatsApp. In South Korea the most likely venue is Kakaotalk, the country’s most popular messaging app. A widely suggested “solution” is to forbid teenagers from particular platforms. But then they will migrate to another.Facebook and Instagram use artificial intelligence to spot abusive language. Most social-media sites have instructions on how to report disturbing material and block other users. Users can anonymously flag posts by others who they think might be suicidal. The source of concern will then receive suggestions and support. Facebook this week announced new ways for users to avoid “unwanted, offensive or hurtful experiences”. They will be able to delete or hide a whole set of comments at once. And it will be easier to report bullying anonymously, including on another’s behalf. But bullied teenagers are unlikely to find solace in any of this. A recent survey in Britain found that 70% of them thought that social-media companies do too little to prevent bullying.Schools around the world have varying ways of dealing with bullying, ranging from banning mobile phones to using software that blocks social-media platforms in school grounds. Italy passed an anti-cyber-bullying law last year. It requires schools to assign a staff member responsible for tackling the problem. Websites must remove bullying content within 48 hours. But reducing cyber-bullying through legislation is often tricky. The Canadian province of Nova Scotia introduced an anti-cyber-bullying bill after a high-profile teenage suicide. But the law was later struck down by the courts for violating free speech.Many scholars agree that the answer to tackling cyber-bullying lies in educating both children and adults in digital skills. Around a third of internet users are under 18. Yet Tijana Milosevic, a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Oslo, says minors are rarely asked about how to curb cyber-bullying. As they use social media without adult supervision, they often find it hard to tell their parents when something goes wrong online. Mrs Trump has produced a leaflet, suggesting parents discuss with their children their online lives, about which they often know nothing. Sensible advice—like her injunction to set an example of good online behaviour, and to remind children that “online actions have consequences”. If only adults could take this lesson to heart.This article appeared in the International section of the print edition under the headline "Clicks and stones"
