Trendy sushi spot with Versace Mansion outpost opens in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn of all places
A posh hotel in Flatiron, the Versace Mansion on Miami Beach and ... Sheepshead Bay?
The frumpy southern Brooklyn nabe known for old-school joints like Roll-N-Roaster and Randazzo’s Clam Bar is now home to the newest outpost of a trendy sushi spot with locations in hip Manhattan areas like Union Square and Hotel 32 32 in Murray Hill, along with South Beach’s extravagant Versace Mansion.
Sushi by Bou opened May 30 at 1811 Emmons Ave., the restaurant-lined strip just across the street from the bay that regularly launches fishing charters and boozy party boats. And as early in the evening as 5:45 p.m. on the Saturday after the opening, the spot had already created enough buzz that couples were being turned away from the small counter that only seats eight to 10 guests, with staffers telling them the next available seating wasn’t until 11 p.m.
And that was with the half-hour time limits that guests are given to eat to their $50-per-person omakase meal, which consists of 12 pieces of sushi chosen by the chef and served one-at-a-time. “Get ready for a treat,” departing guests who dined during an earlier slot told those waiting to be seated.
As for how Sheepshead Bay landed the latest location, and Brooklyn’s only outpost of the hotspot, fans can thank one of Sushi by Bou’s partners, Michael Sinensky. The native of Rockaway, Queens, which was devastated by 2012's Superstorm Sandy, wanted to open up a location near his hometown that would help another area affect by the storm. Sheepshead Bay, which saw businesses close after horrific flooding, was it. 
“I’m from Rockaway Beach and I’ve been frequenting Sheepshead Bay my whole life," Sinensky told the Daily News. "Sushi by Bou brings a super high quality sushi experience at an affordable price to this neighborhood. Our experience is more similar to a sushi experience in Tokyo than one in New York City so this is a treat for sushi connoisseurs.”
The omakase, which translates to “I will leave it to you,” boasts a dozen pieces including scallop, BBQ eel, salmon, tuna, sea urchin and spotted prawn. Cocktails, all priced at $17, include the Yuzu Honey Bee, made with bourbon, honey syrup, yuzu juice (a citrus fruit) and dotted with pink peppercorn. There’s also beer, including a $12 Sapporo served in a sizable frosty glass, and several types of sake available by the glass or bottle.

While there are a few booths in the eatery, sushi isn’t served there and they’re reserved for guests who want to unwind with tea, coffee or dessert after the omakase experience.
This is the fourth Sushi by Bou location to open this year, following the one in a suite at The Villa Casa Casuarina, the hotel that took over the late designer Gianni Versace’s mansion in South Beach, along with outposts in Hotel 32 32 in Murray Hill and another in Union Square.

