Director's Cut of K: Return of Kings' Final Episode Adds Unaired Scene
posted on 2015-12-27 04:00 UTC-8 by Jennifer Sherman

The official website for the K: Return of Kings anime announced on Saturday that the 
7th Blu-ray Disc and DVD volume will include an unaired scene in the 13th episode, 
"Kings." The director's cut version of the final episode will include a new, 
approximately 5-minute scene that involves the Red Clan and Blue Clan.

The 7th Blu-ray Disc and DVD volume is slated to ship in Japan on March 9. 
The anime series' final episode premiered in Japan on Saturday.

The anime premiered in October, and Hulu and Viz's Neon Alley service streamed the series as it aired in Japan.

The official website for K: Return of Kings describes the story of the new anime season:
In modern Japan, where history has strangely overlapped with reality. 
There, seven "Kings" with great superpowers existed. 
Along with their clansman to whom they shared their own power with, 
the kings each formed clans. 
Order bound by blue, red flames that cause chaos, irregularities that shine in white, 
and reforms branched off into green. 
The Kings, each with their own abilities, now...
The Blue King Reisi Munakata, the leader of the Blue Clan "Scepter 4," 
held great responsibilities on his back. 
The tower that Gold King Daikaku Kokujoji supervised called the Dresden Slate 
was still on his mind, and he felt a great burden by 
killing the previous Red King, Mikoto Suoh.
On the other hand, the former Red Clan "Homra" clansman Anna Kushina experienced 
the attacks from the Green Clan "jungle" and awakened as the next Red King. By doing this, she bound her comrades through a strong bond once again.
Finally, White Clan members Neko and Kuroh believe that the White 
King Yashiro is still alive, and seek his whereabouts. 
However, it was not just them searching for the White King. 
The Green King Nagare Hisui once again...
With "jungle" once again jumping back into action, the fates of the various Kings are brought together.

Shingo Suzuki is serving as the director and character designer for the new season at studio GoHands. 
Suzuki previously directed the first season and the K: Missing Kings sequel film. 
Yui Horie is performing "Asymmetry" as the anime's opening theme, 
and CustomiZ is performing "Kai" (Solution) as the ending theme.

Viz Media announced in July that it licensed K: Return of Kings and K: Missing Kings. 
Hulu and Neon Alley streamed the first anime season and the film. 
Viz Media released the first series on Blu-ray Disc and DVD.
