
Womens World Cup game-changing moments No 4: Brandi Chastain in 1999

Womens World Cup game-changing moments No 4: Brandi Chastain in 1999
The 1999 World Cup games were watched by 660,000 fans and will for ever be associated with USA defender celebrating the winning penalty by ripping off her shirt

Barry Glendenning


Thu 20 Jun 2019 10.00BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 10.41BST


The Rose Bowl, Pasadena  a virtual cauldron on a typically sweltering Californian summers day. Its 10 July, 1999, and in the packed stands a partisan crowd looks on as Brandi Chastain makes the long, lonely walk from the centre-circle, catches the ball casually tossed her way and carefully places it on the penalty spot. Anxious not to catch the eye of Chinas goalkeeper, Gao Hong, who had psyched her out in similar circumstances earlier that year, Chastain turns away and retreats. One step, two steps, three steps, four steps, five steps, six. She turns back to face the goal, takes a final couple of paces backwards, another two forward and pauses for a breath.
She begins her run-up, knowing Gao has done her homework and is expecting her to shoot with her right foot. It is why she has been practising with her left following a chat with the USAs head coach, Tony DiCicco. It is also why, after a scoreless draw over 90 minutes and an additional 30 of Golden Goal extra-time, he insisted the defender be named as the fifth penalty taker when she was originally down as sixth. It is why, having seen her teams goalkeeper, Briana Scurry, save Chinas third from Liu Ying, she now knows it is all down to her and her untested left peg. With the World Cup up for grabs, she begins her run-up and the 90,185 fans present hold their breath.
Following a successful execution of the decisive spot-kick in a shootout, there is a brief moment when whoever scored it has time to process the magnitude of what they have just achieved. In the six seconds it took the first of Chastains jubilant teammates to sprint from the halfway line to swarm her in celebration, she found time to turn an entire sport on its head.
In the fleeting second it took one particular TV camera to cut back to the player, having just captured her left-foot drive fizzing beyond Gao, Chastain removed her shirt and swung it in triumph above her head. In her soon-to-be famous black sports bra, she sank to her knees and with both fists raised in triumph, looked towards the sky.
Behind the goal, the Sports Illustrated photographer Robert Beck was in position by mistake. A specialist in surfing action pictures who did not understand the rules of football, he had only been sent along to the World Cup final as his publications third man, tasked with taking shots of the great and the good like Jennifer Lopez and Bill Clinton in the crowd. Having spent the entire game located high in the stands, he and his assistant made their way down to the pitch upon learning what would happen if the match remained all-square at the end of extra-time.
Positioning himself behind the goal, Beck was promptly ordered to move because his presence might distract those involved in the shootout. As he made to do so, he was then told to stay put because his attempt to carry his 