Madman Entertainment Announces Acquisitions at Brisbane Supanova 2012
posted on 2012-11-15 03:30 UTC-8 by Jon Hayward
Nine new titles announced for 2013 including two streaming on the Madman Screening Room immediately;

Madman Entertainment made the following announcements at Supanova Expo 2012: Brisbane last weekend. 
They will be following up with more announcements at the first Supanova Expo 2012: Adelaide.

Acquisition Summary
•	K: Streaming online every Wednesday here for the first episode. Home release announced in 2013.
•	Hellsing Ultimate: Episodes I to IV collection re-released in February 2013, 
Episodes V to VIII collection in March 2013, IX and X at some point in the future. 
All released on Blu-Ray and DVD.
•	Magi: The Labyrinth of Magic: Streaming online every Monday, click here for the first episode. 
Home video in 2013.
•	Blast of Tempest: Streaming online TBC, home video in 2013.
•	Sword Art Online: Streaming online TBC, home video in 2013.
•	Blood-C and Blood-C: The Last Dark: Release date in 2013.
•	K-ON! The Movie: Japan Film Festival Sydney / Melbourne in December, home video in 2013.
•	Bleach the Movie: Hell Verse: DVD, Blu-Ray and Digital in March 2013.
•	Fate/stay night: Unlimited Blade Works: DVD and Digital in March 2013.
Acquisition Titles

K
Ashinaka High School's campus is built on top of a island and Yashiro Isana (aka Shiro) is one of Ashinaka's students. 
When Shiro goes on a errand for a classmate he becomes embroiled in a war 
between the seven psychic clans that secretly rule Japan. 
He finds himself accused of murdering a member of the red clan, Homura, 
a crime he does not remember comitting. 
As a result he is hunted by "The Red King", Mitoko Suoh and "The Blue King" Reisi Munakata 
who commands the blue clan, Scepter 4. 
However with the assistance of Scepter 4 member Kuroh Yatogami, Shiro has a chance 
to prove his innoncence, if he can do so before Kuroh kills him.
Shingo Suzuki (Mardock Scramble) is directing and handling character design for the series 
and the GoRA group are handling the series composition. 
Makoto Furuta(Seitokai Yakuindomo) is the chief animation director 
alongside animation producer Ringo Kishimoto (Asa Made Jugyou Chu!). 
As a "GoRA Project" group member, producer 
Gou Nakanishi (Fafner, Asura Cryin', Negima!) is participating in the project.
The show's voice cast includes Daisuke Namikawa, Tomokazu Sugita, Komatsu, Kenjiro Tsuda, 
Daisuke Ono, Mamoru Miyano, Miyuki Sawashiro, Yui Horie, Takahiro Sakurai, Jun Fukuyama, 
Yuichi Nakamura, Satomi Satou, and Yuuki Kaji.
Madman will be streaming K in their Screening Room from 
Wednesday the 14th of November at 12pm with new episodes added every Wednesday at 12pm. 
A home release will be announced in 2013.

Hellsing Ultimate - Episodes V to VIII
Hellsing Ultimate is a OVA series based on the Hellsing manga by Kouta Hirano. 
Hellsing is a secret organisation sponsored by the British government that 
deals with threats that go bump in the night, specifically Vampires. 
The organisation is controlled by Integra Hellsing (a decendent of Van Helsing) 
who has a secret weapon, the vampire Alucard. 
And while Alucard and his fledgling vampire Seras Victoria are extremely effective 
as vampire exterminators, it will be an extremely bloody fight against an army 
that has been plotting for over fifty years to decend the world into war.
The series has had a interesting production life with Satelight producing 
episodes I to IV from 2006 to 2008, Madhouse Studios handling episodes V to VII from 2008 
to 2009 and a co-production between Graphinica and Kelmadick for the final 
two episodes (VIII to X) from 2009 to 2012.
Hellsing Ultimate episodes I to IV will be re-released in February 2013 
in both DVD and Blu-Ray collections. 
In March episodes V to VIII will be released, again on DVD and Blu-Ray 
and a final third collection containing episodes IX and X will be released, 
but there are no dates at this stage.

Magi: The Labyrinth of Magic
Fourteen years ago in a land covered by desert, mysterious towers called "Dungeons" 
suddenly appeared across the land. 
Many are drawn to these dungeons due to rumours of treasure lining their dangerous walls. 
Aladdin is travelling with Ugo, a djinn who is summoned by his magical flute 
and after an encounter with Alibaba, a merchant, they decide to conquer a dungeon 
and gain it's treaure.
Shinobu Ohtaka's original manga re-imagines tales 
from the classic story One Thousand and One Nights (also known as Arabian Nights). 
Ohtaka, the creator of Sumomomo Momomo, has been serializing Magi in 
Shogakukan's Weekly Shonen Sundaymagazine since 2009, 
and Shogakukan will publish the 13th compiled book volume next month. 
The manga has 4.4 million copies in circulation.
Director Koji Masunari (Read or Die, Welcome to THE SPACE SHOW) 
is helming the anime adaptation at A-1 Pictures. 
Toshifumi Akai (Kokoro Connect, Sound of the Sky) is serving as the character designer 
and chief animation director, and Hiroyuki Yoshino (Accel World, Guilty Crown, My-HiME) 
is handling the scripts. 
Shiro Sagisu (Bleach, Evangelion, Berserk films) is composing the music. 
Magi is a 90th anniversary project from Shogakukan and started screening in Japan on October 7th, 2012 on MBS and TBS.
The includes Kaori Ishihara as Aladdin, Yuuki Kaji as Ali Baba, Haruka Tomatsu as Morgiana, 
Daisuke Ono as Sinbad, Ryohei Kimura as Judal, and Toshiyuki Morikawa as Ugo-kun.
Madman will be screening Magi in their Screening Room from Monday the 12th of November 
and new episodes will be added every Monday. 
You can view the first episode on Madman's Screening Room here. 
Video release will follow in 2013.

Blast of Tempest
Blast of Tempest adapts Kyou Shirodaira, Arihide Sano, and Ren Saizaki's fantasy mystery manga. 
The story centers around Yoshino Takigawa (played by Kouki Uchiyama), 
an ordinary high school student with a mysterious friend named 
Mahiro Fuwa (Toshiyuki Toyonaga). 
Mahiro made a deal with a witch named Hakaze to hunt down the killers of his parents 
and sister. 
Now Mahiro is missing, and Hakaze confronts Yoshino. 
Yoshino finds himself involved in a crisis that may doom the entire world.
Studio Bones is producing the project. 
Masahiro Ando (Sword of the Stranger, Hana-Saku Iroha) is directing the series, 
and Mari Okada (Black Butler, anohana, Hana-Saku Iroha) is serving as series script editor. 
The anime premiered in Japan on October 4.
Madman states that a streaming season is yet to be confirmed, but a home video release will follow in 2013.

Sword Art Online
Sword Art Online adapts Reki Kawahara's (Accel World) light novel series of the same name. 
The story revolves around a boy named Kazuto "Kirito" Kirigaya who enters a virtual-reality, 
massively multi-player online (MMO) world called "Sword Art Online." 
There is no escape from this world unless the player clears the game, 
but "game over" means the death of the player. 
The half-year television series premiered in July.
SAO is produced by A-1 Pictures under the direction of Tomohiko Ito (Occult Academy) 
with art direction by Takayuki Nagashima and Yusuke Takeda (Giant Robo, Eden of the East) 
and music by Yuki Kajiura (Fate/Zero, Puella Magi Madoka Magica).
Madman states that a streaming season is yet to be confirmed, 
but a home video release will follow in 2013.

Blood-C
"Horrifying beasts with a hunger for human flesh prey on the citizens of a quiet town. 
In moonlit twilight, Saya slays the monsters and returns home drenched in blood. 
As the attacks increase in frequency and intensity, her enemies relay cryptic messages 
about a broken contract. 
Limbs are torn from flesh and skulls are crushed and devoured 
while the huntress struggles with paralyzing visions and gaping holes in her memory. 
When the humans Saya promised to protect reveal the sickening truth about her role 
in the violence, she learns her mission isn't as clear cut as she thought-and her most 
sadistic foe of all is so close she can taste it." - From Madman Press Release
Madman Entertainment will be releasing both the 2011, 12 episode anime series 
and the 2012 film continuation Blood-C: The Last Dark. 
Both the television series and the film had Manga creator team CLAMP handling the story 
and original character designs alongside animation character designer/chief animation 
director Kazuchika Kise (Evangelion: 1.0 You Are [Not] Alone). 
The television series was directed by Tsutomu Mizushima (xxxHOLiC) 
with creative supervision by Blood: The Last Vampire planning assistant 
and Blood+ director Jun'ichi Fujisaku. 
The film was directed by Naoyoshi Shiotani 
(Tokyo Marble Chocolate, key animator on Blood+ and Blood-C). 
Both projects were produced by Production I.G
Blood-C is the latest addition to the Blood vampire franchise. 
Started in 2000 with Hiroyuki Kitakubo (Golden Boy,JoJo's Bizarre Adventure) 
and Production I.G's Blood: The Last Vampire film, 
in which Mamoru Oshii (Ghost in the Shell, The Sky Crawlers) 
and Kenji Kamiyama (Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex, Eden of the East) 
created the story and screenplay. 
The franchise continued with Jun'ichi Fujisaku's Blood+ in 2005 
and Chris Nahon's live-action adaptation of the original movie in 2009 alongside 
several manga spinoffs.
Madman Entertainment states that Blood-C will be released in 2013.

K-ON! The Movie
K-ON! The Movie follows the five-piece girl band Hokago Tea Time as they graduate high-school. 
Upon passing their university entrance exam, Yui, Ritsu, Mio and Tsumugi 
discuss a variety of things that they wanted to do before graduation, 
including doing something for Azusa. In the process they manage to go to London 
for their graduation trip and end up in a whirlwind mix of gigs, 
adventures and comic mishaps.
The cast and crew of K-ON! return for the film with direction by Naoko Yamada, 
screenplay by Reiko Yoshida and art direction by Seiki Tamura 
alongside the voice talents of Aki Toyosaki as Yui Hirasawa, 
Ayana Taketatsu as Azusa Nakano, Minako Kotobuki as Tsumugi Kotobuki, 
Satomi Satou as Ritsu Tainaka and Yoko Hikasa as Mio Akiyama.
K-ON! The Movie will be screened as part of the Japan Film Festival in Sydney 
and Melbourne in December and will be released on home video in 2013.

Bleach the Movie: Hell Verse
Masked denizens from Hell (known as Sinners) discover that 
Ichigo Kurosaki is the key to their freedom and kidnap YUZU, Ichigo's sister, 
dragging her back to hell. 
Ichigo is informed that Hell is a realm where even Soul Reapers are 
forbidden to interfere so of course he launches a rescue effort, 
travelling to Hell with Kokuto (a sinner) to save YUZUfrom Shuren, 
the commander of the Sinners. 
But Ichigo and his friends are unaware what effect their actions can have 
on Hell and on Earth.
Bleach the Movie: Hell Verse was overseen by Bleach's creator, 
Tite Kubo with direction by Noriyuki Abe (Bleach,Flame of Recca) 
with a script by Natsuko Takahasho (Hell Girl, Chrono Crusade) and Ookubo Masahiro (Bleach).
Madman Entertainment will release Bleach the Movie: Hell Verse on DVD, Blu-Ray and Digital in March 2013.

Fate/stay night: Unlimited Blade Works
Shirou Emiya finds himself an unwilling participant in a deadly competition 
where seven Mages summon heroic spirits as servants to duel each other to the death. 
They compete for the chance to make a wish from the Holy Grail, 
which has the power to grant any wish. 
Shiro is unskilled as a mage and knows nothing of the Holy Grail War, 
but he and his servant, Saber, enters into a temporary partnership with another Mage, 
Rin Tohsaka. 
However, problems arise between Shirou and Rin's servant, Archer, 
who seems to seriously despise him.
The all-new animated production covered the Unlimited Blade Works storyline from 
Type-Moon's game franchise. 
The film opened in Japan in January 2010, and the film's Blu-ray Disc release in Japan 
in October of that year sold 44,000 copies in its first week.
Director Yuji Yamaguchi, series script supervisor Takuya Sato, character designer 
and chief animation directorMegumi Ishihara, 
and Studio DEEN all returned from the Fate/stay night television series. 
Voice cast membersNoriaki Sugiyama, Ayako Kawasumi, Kana Ueda, Noriko Shitaya, 
Mai Kadowaki, Miki Itou, Junichi Suwabe, Yuu Asakawa, and Jouji Nakata 
also reprised their respective roles.
Available on DVD and Digital in March 2013.
