
TV debate brought home a terrifying truth: one of these men will be PM
Not one of the candidates came away from Tuesdays debate looking ready to lead
Contact author


Tue 18 Jun 2019 23.29BST


Last modified on Wed 19 Jun 2019 10.52BST


Perhaps the most scathing line of the night was the title. It was called Our Next Prime Minister and as the hour wore on, those four words sounded increasingly like a rebuke to the nation. Look at us, they seemed to say: a fabled country with a long, proud history and one of these five jokers is actually going to be our next prime minister.
It was a painful hour, delivered via a format that featured too much cross-talk and too little cross-examination, that saw the candidates perched awkwardly on gameshow stools, repeatedly talking over each other and failing to answer the often sharp and pointed questions from members of the public.
It seems invidious to pick out the most cringeworthy moment, since there were so many contenders for that prize, but surely one of the most toe-curling segments came in response to a question about Islamophobia from Abdullah in Bristol. Each of the five men who would be PM began boasting of their Muslim-friendly credentials, from Boris Johnsons invocation of his Muslim great-grandpa to an earnest salaam alaikum from Rory Stewart. Even Sajid Javid managed to sound oddly detached when he spoke of having many Muslim friends and family.
And yet, for all that, the hour was not entirely uninformative or unproductive. That Islamophobia section, for example, bore valuable fruit when Javid extracted an impromptu pledge from his colleagues to back an external inquiry into anti-Muslim prejudice in the Conservative party. Whoever wins will not be able to shake that off, and it could have far-reaching consequences.
But there were other moments that were revealing. Johnson may be unstoppable as the bookies favourite, but he hardly resembled the charismatic vote-magnet his supporters like to imagine. His defenders will doubtless say he was reining it in, opting for a safety-first strategy of restraint, making no jokes, starting no rows, doing no harm. But he came over as lacklustre and badly flawed.
Twice he failed to remember Abdullahs name: not ideal when trying to demonstrate that hes no anti-Muslim bigot. He ignored the moderator, Emily Maitlis, so often, she was eventually forced to ask: Can you hear me, Mr Johnson? Again, not a good look for a party with an all-male top table.
More substantively, he flailed on Brexit, unable to offer any coherent idea, let alone plan, for how he would deliver British withdrawal from the European Union by 31 October, still less cope with the multiple consequences of crashing out without a deal. Pressed on how he would maintain an open border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic, he suggested a standstill in the current arrangements, and then tossed out a reference to Gatt 24 or whatever it happens to be. He sounded like he was winging it, hoping that the so-called Gatt 24 provisions would ensure tariff free trade with the EU, when they ensure no such thing: both sides would have to agree a trade deal first.
He came unstuck again and again. His signature tax promise, raising the threshold for the higher rate  a move that would benefit high earners  was reduced to a mere ambition, downgraded from a policy just eight 