Mystics player says she will only publicly talk about a gunfire incident at a D.C. school until she sees action

A Washington Mystics player promised a media “blackout” until Mayor Muriel E. Bowser and a D.C. Council member adequately respond to an episode of gun violence this week at a Southeast elementary school.

In a message she posted to Instagram after visiting Hendley Elementary in Ward 8, starting guard Natasha Cloud said a school event was canceled this week after a bullet broke a front window. Cloud had been at the school to talk with students.

“Our kids can’t even feel safe to go to school right now,” she said on social media. “What are we doing? We’ve got to do better for our youth.”
In a message to Bowser (D) and council member Trayon White Sr. (D-Ward 8), Cloud said she would use her “media privileges as a blackout” if she did not receive a response by Friday morning “with a solution or a sit-down for a solution.”
Cloud followed through on her promise to stage a media blackout to draw attention to the issue and did not discuss basketball Friday before the Mystics’ home loss to Seattle. Cloud gave one statement after the game, and no other players answered questions.

“It directly affected me yesterday,” Cloud said before the game. “Being in [the school], seeing the kids, hearing them talk about it like it’s just something that happens — this shouldn’t be something that happens. Our kids need to be in a safe environment when they’re going to learn. . . . If they can’t go to school, we’re setting them up for failure at a young age.
“I will only discuss this topic until it is fixed,” she said.

Bowser’s office addressed Cloud’s concerns in a statement.

“Mayor Bowser went to the community on Thursday evening to meet with community leaders, their MPD Captain and outreach staff to discuss their concerns and talk about recent incidents. That dialogue will continue as we work to end the senseless violence that has been fueled by the ­unfortunate presence of too many illegal guns.”
Cloud met with the rest of her team and Coach-General Manager Mike Thibault on Friday morning to talk about her plans for a media blackout and “get on the same page.” Thibault has encouraged his players to speak out on issues that are important to them and has helped the team cultivate a culture of social activism. Last week he organized a team visit to the Supreme Court.

When the Mystics moved to their new arena in Southeast, Thibault said, the team felt even more compelled to get involved.

“That was clear — that we’re not just going to make a statement and not do anything,” Thibault said. “We’re going to be involved with schools, we’re going to be involved with Ward 8, and we’re going to try to make a positive impact, whether it’s bringing kids to clinics, bringing kids to games, letting them interact with our players — because that’s our best platform to help.”
