
Ten cities ask EU for help to fight Airbnb expansion
Cities say short-term holiday lettings market is contributing to soaring long-term rents for local people

Jon Henley Europe correspondent


Thu 20 Jun 2019 13.51BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 15.08BST


Ten European cities have demanded more help from the EU in their battle against Airbnb and other holiday rental websites, which they argue are locking locals out of housing and changing the face of neighbourhoods.
In a joint letter, Amsterdam, Barcelona, Berlin, Bordeaux, Brussels, Krakow, Munich, Paris, Valencia and Vienna said the explosive growth of global short-stay lettings platforms must be on the agenda of the next set of European commissioners.
The cities protest comes after the advocate general of the European court of justice found in non-binding opinion in April that under EU law, Airbnb should be considered a digital information provider rather than a traditional real estate agent.
That status, if confirmed by the court, would allow Airbnb and similar platforms to operate freely across the bloc and, crucially, relieve them of responsibility to ensure that landlords are complying with local rules aimed at regulating holiday lets.
European cities believe homes should be used first and foremost for living in, the cities said in a statement released by Amsterdam city council. Many suffer from a serious housing shortage. Where homes can be rented out more lucratively to tourists, they vanish from the traditional housing market.
The cities said that local authorities must be able to counter the adverse effects of short-term holiday lets, such as long-term rents soaring beyond the reach of most residents and the continuing touristification of neighbourhoods, by introducing their own regulations depending on the local situation.
We believe cities are best placed to understand their residents needs, they said. They have always been allowed to regulate local activity through urban planning and housing rules. The advocate general seems to imply this will no longer be possible when it comes to internet giants.
After several years of strong growth, Airbnb currently has more than 18,000 listings in Amsterdam and Barcelona, 22,000 in Berlin and nearly 60,000 in Paris. Data from the campaign group InsideAirbnb suggested last year that more than half were whole apartments or houses, and that even in cities where short-term lets are restricted by local authorities, up to 30% were available for three or more months a year.
Although speculation and poor social housing provision are also factors, many cities say the short-term holiday lettings boom is contributing to soaring long-term rents: Palma de Mallorca last year voted to ban almost all listings after a 50% increase in tourist lets was followed by a 40% rise in residential rents.
Many are now trying to take action: in Paris, landlords face a fine if they fail to register with city hall before letting any property short-term (although many do not), while Amsterdam has tried to cut its annual limit for holiday lets to one month in 12 and Barcelona last year suspended all new short-term rental permits.
But the city authorities now fear that the EUs attempts to promote e-commerce and the sharing economy across the bloc are actively impeding their efforts to ensure that neighbourhoods remain both affordable and liveable for residents.
The cities are not against this type of holiday rental, they said. Tourism provides a city with income and jobs. They do think they should be able to set rules.
In particular, they are concerned 