Fortnite Season 5 Tips And Tricks: What You Should Know About The Changes
It's a whole new world.
Last updated by Jordan Ramée on July 14, 2018 at 5:09AM
Fortnite Season 5 is officially underway, and there's plenty of new content for players to sink their teeth into. We've already extensively covered the changes and additions, but we also wanted to collect all the new tips and tricks you'll have at your disposal. Unless you've dug into the patch notes, there are some notable changes across all platforms that you might not realize; here are some of the biggest.
First and foremost, you'll want to know about the changes made to shotguns--especially considering how significant they've been to player strategy in the battle royale. Shotguns will now indicate how many pellets actually hit, with visible markers appearing within the reticle. You won't be able to cycle between two shotguns like you could before though, as there is now a short period of time after firing a shotgun where another shotgun can't be fired. Measure your shots carefully, or just find another way to kill someone.
For anyone who's struggled to get a revive in a past 50v50 or Teams of 20 game, worry no longer. Fortnite is implementing XP bonuses for reviving teammates in both limited-time modes. You'll only get three bonuses a match though, with an extra 30XP the first time and 10XP for the follow-up second and third time. Hopefully, this influences more players to offer a helping hand instead of leaving their teammates to die.
The Storm is also getting an update. Circles seven, eight, and nine will still shrink but they'll also be able to shift in random directions. You'll need to be ready to hoof it at a moments notice.
Between matches, hitting the "Play Again" button now allows players to preview pickaxe visual and sound effects in the Item Shop, Battle Pass, and Locker.
You'll also have access to the same sound visualizer that were created for mobile on all platforms. Flipping it on puts a small visual indicator on your screen that alerts you to nearby gunfire, footsteps, or chests. However, audible sound effects are muted while the visualizer is on. The new option can be found in the Accessibility tab. Don't worry about it if you play on a mobile platform, you'll be unaffected by this change.
While in the new vehicle, the All-Terrain Kart, players will:
Get a speed boost after drifting.
Be able to use the roof as a bounce pad.
Work together to achieve a higher jump (rear passengers can lean back by holding S on keyboards or holding back on the thumbstick for controllers).
On mobile, there's a new option that lets your gun fire automatically.