Landmark LGTBQ documentary ‘The Queen’ newly restored for new audience more than five decades after storming Cannes
Long live “The Queen.”
Frank Simon’s 1968 groundbreaking documentary — chronicling the gender-bending, high drama of the 1967 Miss All-American Camp Beauty Pageant — is a cult classic within the LGTBQ community, most notably for giving a raw glimpse of the world of drag queens.
Now, with a major anniversary in LGBTQ history at hand, “The Queen” is reclaiming her throne on the big screen.
The 68-minute film has been restored and will open at New York’s IFC Center on June 28.
“The Queen” detailed the pageant held at Town Hall in Midtown. It was narrated by Jack Doroshow (also known as Flawless Sabrina) and featured Top 5 finalist Miss Crystal LaBeija, largely regarded as one of the inventors of the drag queen “house” culture — the basis of Ryan Murphy’s hit FX series “Pose.”
There is no time better to restore and showcase the film, said Bret Wood, vice president of the New York-based independent arthouse film distributor Kino Lorber.
“The 50th anniversary of the Stonewall Riots makes this a perfect time to revive ‘The Queen’ because it opens up a window to that time in the late 1960s when LGBTQ culture, before it was known as such, was emerging into the national consciousness,” Wood told the Daily News.
“The drag community had cultivated the confidence to step out into the public spotlight, and captured the attention of the intelligentsia and art world,” he continued. “Whether or not they perceived themselves as such, these performers truly were pioneers in bringing about social change, in a most unconventional way.”
One of the most memorable scenes of “The Queen” — where Crystal LaBeija broke protocol and left the stage in a huff after finishing fourth — has lived on in infamy on social media and viral video clips.
That scene, Wood said, inspired Crystal LaBeija to found of House of LaBeija, New York City’s oldest group of drag queen and ballroom scene personalities.
In 2016, Grammy Award winning hip-hop artist Frank Ocean sampled LaBeija’s voice for a skit on his “Endless” video album.
Jeffreys, a New York University professor said drag performances have always had a place in pop culture, even dating back to vaudeville when female impersonator Julian Eltinge was a top earner.
“It’s the sex and gender line that fascinates,” Jeffreys explained. “Most people can’t believe how easy it is to perform a crossover of these seemingly rigid lines and find it entertaining if they don’t find it horrifying or morally objectionable.”
With official revival of “The Queen,” Wood is hoping that people used to mainstream acceptance of drag queen culture can appreciate a time “when striding onto a runway was an act of rebellion, for which there were potentially severe repercussions.”
Kino Lorber will present the new 4K restoration of “The Queen” as special sneak preview with surprise guests and Q&A with activist Ceyenne Doroshow, and journalist and author Diana Tourjée on June 27 at IFC Center.