Mechanics are the inner workings of Dota 2. The following is a list of mechanics topics. Click on each topic to view how they are calculated, where they originate, as well as their complex interactions with other mechanics elements.
Unit mechanics
See also: Hero Mechanics and Table of hero attributes
These properties are used by units in general, including heroes, creeps, and summons. Heroes possess a number of unique mechanics that other units don't.
Abilities
Cooldown
Skills possessed by units, to be used on the battlefield. All heroes have at least three basic abilities, and one ultimate ability. Hero abilities are acquired upon leveling up with experience. Most abilities need to be activated, while others are passive. Active abilities have a cooldown period between uses.
Attributes
Strength attribute symbol.png Strength
Agility attribute symbol.png Agility
Intelligence attribute symbol.png Intelligence
Baseline stats that increase with each level. Strength increases health and health regeneration, Agility increases armor and attack speed, Intelligence increases mana, mana regeneration, and spell amplification. All heroes are associated with one of three attributes, known as their Primary Attribute. Raising a hero's Primary Attribute also raises their physical attack damage. Attributes can also be increased by items and abilities.
Talents	Bonuses that increase a hero's stats and properties. Players can pick one of two talents at levels 10, 15, 20, and 25.
Experience	Points needed for heroes to level up. Experience is gained from killing creeps and enemy heroes. Maximum level is 25, after which experience no longer serves any purpose.
Spawning	Heroes spawn at the fountain, in their base. Dead heroes respawn after a set amount of time. Respawn time is determined by the hero's level.
Health
Health regeneration
The amount of hit points a hero has. Health and health regeneration can be increased by strength, items, abilities, and talents.
Mana
Mana regeneration
The resource required to use most abilities. Mana and mana regeneration can be increased by intelligence, items, abilities, and talents.
Armor
Armor types
Armor manipulation
Effective HP
Property that reduces incoming physical damage by a scaling amount per attack. Armor comes in three types, and can be increased or decreased by some items and abilities.
Damage block	Property that reduces incoming damage by a fixed amount per attack. It is granted by some items and abilities.
Magic resistance	Property that reduces incoming magical damage by a percentage. Most heroes start with 25% Magic Resistance. It can be further increased by some items and abilities.
Evasion
True strike
Accuracy
Property that grants a percentage chance to completely avoid a physical attack. True strike allows a hero to ignore evasion.
Movement speed	The rate at which a unit moves. Movement speed can be increased and decreased by items and abilities.
Turn rate	The rate at which a unit's model turns. Most actions require the model to be facing towards the direction of the action about to be taken.
Collision size	The internal size of a unit, which is impassable and can block other units. Most heroes have the same collision size, regardless of their graphical model.
Aura	Passive buffs and debuffs that surround a hero or unit in a circular radius. Auras come from abilities and items, and cannot be dispelled.
Illusions	Clones of heroes that are generated by abilities, items, or runes. Illusions come in different types, and possess lesser properties of the original hero.
Attack mechanics
Mechanic	Introduction
Damage types
Physical damage
Magical damage
Pure damage
HP Removal
There are three overall categories of damage. Physical damage is done by basic attacks, and some abilities. Magical damage is done by abilities and items. Pure damage is the rarest, and penetrates armor and magic resistance. HP Removal ignores all forms of damage manipulation, and is not technically considered a type of damage.
Attack damage
Hero damage
Basic damage
Pierce damage
Siege damage
Damage done by basic attacks. This type of damage is always physical, but is split into four minor types that interact differently with armor types.
Spell damage
Spell amplification
Damage done by any source other than basic attacks. Spell damage can come in magical, physical, or pure damage types. It is amplified by the Intelligence attribute.
Damage manipulation
Damage amplification
Damage reduction
Damage negation
Calculations that affect the final value of a damage instance. Items and abilities can amplify, reduce, or negate final damage.
Damage over time	Periodic damage done over intervals, usually in small amounts.
Attack speed	The time it takes to perform an attack. Attack speed can be increased or decreased by items and abilities.
Attack animation
Attack point
Attack backswing
The model animation that plays when a unit attacks. Damage is dealt at the attack point, followed by the attack backswing of the animation. Attack animations play faster or slower according to a unit's attack speed.
Cast animation
Cast point
Cast backswing
The model animation that plays when a unit uses an ability. The ability is used at the cast point, followed by the cast backswing of the animation. Each ability has its own unique cast animation. The speed of cast animations cannot be altered, and therefore cast speed stays the same throughout the match for each ability.
Channeling	The model animation for certain abilities that require a unit to stand still in order to affect the ability over time.
Missile speed	The speed at which the projectile from a ranged basic attack travels. Abilities have unique missile speeds for their projectiles.
Attack range	The distance from which a unit can perform basic attacks. Most melee heroes have a range of 150, while ranged heroes can have a range of up to 700.
Attack modifiers
Main Article: Attack modifier
Additional effects can be added to basic attacks. Some of these effects stack with each other in several ways, while others do not stack at all.

Mechanic	Introduction
Critical strike	Modifier that increases damage from basic attacks by a percentage multiplier.
Cleave & Splash	Modifiers that cause damage from basic attacks to spill past a single target to a larger area.
Bash	Modifier that gives basic attacks a chance to stun.
Lifesteal	Modifier that causes attacks to regenerate a portion of their damage as health.
Mana break	Modifier that causes attacks to burn mana from the target, dealing damage based on the burned amount
Active/Autocast	Modifiers that are innate to abilities, and can be toggled on or off.
World mechanics
Mechanic	Introduction
Game map
Lanes
Jungle
The battlefield where Dota 2 matches takes place. Three Lanes are present on the map, and lead into each team's base. In between the lanes are wooded areas known as the Jungle.
Buildings
Ancient
Towers
Barracks
Shrines
Glyph of Fortification
Structures that aid in the defense of each opposing side. The main building is the Ancient, which must be destroyed in order for a side to win. Buildings can be made temporarily invulnerable with Glyph of Fortification.
Shops	Stores scattered across the map that sell items to heroes.
Gold
Buyback
Currency used to buy items, which increase a hero's capabilities. Heroes gain a small amount of gold every second, and can earn more gold by killing creeps, enemy heroes, and buildings. Dead heroes can use gold to Buyback, allowing them to respawn instantly.
Items
Recipes
Item sharing
Item passive stacking
Disassembling
Objects that can be purchased on the game map. Items increase a hero's properties, and grant them special abilities and effects. Smaller items combine into larger items, with the help of recipes. Some items can be disassembled. Most items cannot be shared with other players.
Courier	A special unit owned by each team that holds and delivers items to players.
Creeps
Lane creeps
Neutral creeps
Units that automatically spawn on the map. They are killed for gold and experience. Lane creeps attack and push towards the opposing base. Neutral creeps reside in the jungle.
Summons	Units that are created by heroes to aid them in combat.
Wards	Units that provide vision, or some other utility.
Runes	Special boosters that spawn on the map. Runes give extra gold and experience to heroes who pick them up, as well as a variety of power-up effects.
Vision
Ground vision
Flying vision
Shared vision
True sight
A unit's ability to see the map in real time, versus being covered by the fog of war. Most units have a radius of vision around them. Some units can turn invisible, and can only be detected by True Sight.
Time of day	The cycle of night and day. Some heroes have abilities that function differently at night. Vision is also limited at night.
Trees	Vegetation that serve as impassible obstacles on the game map. Trees can be cut down, and will regrow over time. Some items and abilities can interact with trees.
Pseudo-random distribution	The chance an ability or item's effect will occur, increasing every time the effect does not occur.
True random distribution	The chance an ability or item's effect will occur, calculated independently of previous instances.
Status effects
Main Article: Disable
Status effects are a variety of conditions that can afflict units. They are caused by abilities and items.

Mechanic	Introduction
Stun
Shackle
Unit is unable to move or perform any actions. Shackle is the same as stun, but requires the attacking hero to channel the effect.
Root	Unit is unable to move, but can perform some actions.
Hex	Unit is transformed into a critter, and is unable to perform any actions except move at a slow pace.
Cyclone	Unit is swept into the air, where it is invulnerable, but cannot move or perform any actions.
Hide/Banish	Unit is temporarily removed from the game map, and cannot be damaged or affected by any other mechanics.
Blind	Unit has a chance to miss basic attacks.
Silence	Unit is disabled from using unit abilities, but can still use item abilities.
Mute	Unit is disabled from using item abilities.
Break	Unit's passive abilities are disabled.
Disarm	Unit cannot attack, but can still use abilities.
Slow	Unit's movement speed is reduced. Most slows end after a set time, while other slows gradually decrease over time.
Trap	Unit's movement is restricted by barriers, but can still perform actions.
Taunt	Unit is forced to attack a certain target, ignoring player input.
Fear	Unit is forced to run towards their team's fountain, ignoring player input.
Forced movement	Unit is forced to move in a certain direction, ignoring player input.
Teleport/Blink	Unit moves to a location instantaneously.
Invisibility	Unit cannot be seen by normal vision, but can be detected by True Sight.
Phased	Unit can move through other units, ignoring collision size.
Invulnerability	Unit cannot be damaged by physical attacks.
Spell immunity	Unit cannot be targeted or affected by most spells.
Ethereal	Unit assumes a ghostly form, becoming immune to physical damage, but takes more magical damage. Ethereal units cannot attack.
Dispelling
Main Article: Dispel
Dispel refers to methods that remove buffs, debuffs, and status effects. This is an important topic to understanding the internal interactions of Dota 2.

Mechanic	Introduction
Basic dispel	A simple dispel granted by abilities and items.
Purge	The same as a basic dispel, but with the addition of a slow debuff.
Spell immunity	Some forms of spell immunity provide a basic dispel when activated.
Strong dispel	A greater dispel that removes more status effects, granted by a handful of abilities.
Removable buffs	A list of buffs that can be removed by various forms of dispel.
Removable debuffs	A list of debuffs that can be removed by various forms of dispel.
Gameplay
Mechanic	Introduction
Game modes	Map conditions with different rulesets regarding hero picking and other variables.
Custom Games
Modding
Game modes created by community members, with its own set of rules and assets. Custom games are made through modding.
Heads-up display (HUD)	The in-game graphical interface, showing a hero's portrait, abilities, items, stats, and more.
Minimap
Scan
A small graphical representation of the game map, where heroes and other information can be seen. Scanning is a way to reveal the presence of enemies on the minimap.
Disjoint	The act of dodging a projectile using an ability or item. Not all projectiles can be disjointed.
Denying	The act of killing a friendly hero, creep or building with low health. Denying prevents enemy heroes from gaining gold and experience from the denied unit or building.
Creep control techniques	Methods to manipulate creeps for the purpose of positioning, or spawning more creeps to kill later on.
Roles	Play styles that heroes fulfill to serve a specific function for their team.
Ganking	The strategy of ambushing and attacking isolated enemy heroes in order to secure an early game advantage.
Pushing	The strategy of focusing on destroying buildings and pressuring the lanes.
Harassment	The strategy of attacking opponents to intimidate them from farming effectively, especially during the early game.
Farming	The act of accumulating gold by killing as many creeps as possible.
Jungling	The act of farming in the jungle by killing neutral creeps, instead of farming in the lanes.
Initiating	The act of starting a teamfight, usually by disabling opponents with powerful abilities first.
System
See also: System Menu
This is a list of major functions that are not directly part of the game. It involves various features regarding player input, Steam, and others.

Mechanic	Introduction
Patches	Updates to the game client, including changes to elements outside of mechanics, such as cosmetic items or the graphical interface.
Versions	Updates to game mechanics, including new heroes, items, and balance adjustments. Versions are shipped with patches.
Trophies & Profile Levels	In-game achievements that are awarded for accomplishing various feats.
Events	Time-limited promotions that come with exclusive cosmetic items, trophies, and more. Events usually take place around big tournaments and holidays.
Spectating
Replay
A function that allows players to watch live games, as well as replays of past games.
Settings
Main Article: Game Settings
Game settings allow users to change display, graphics, audio, and control settings.

Mechanic	Introduction
Controls
Hotkeys
Chat wheel
Settings for hotkeys, mouse cursor interactions, and the in-game chat wheel.
Launch Options	Command lines that can be entered Steam's settings to change the Dota 2 client.
Console commands	List of commands that can be used through the in-game console.
Cheats	List of official cheats that can be used in private lobbies, for the purpose of testing. Cheats cannot be used in matchmaking.