
The Tories want to back a winner. But they dont know how to win
Contact author


Tue 18 Jun 2019 18.42BST


Last modified on Tue 18 Jun 2019 21.59BST


Two primal impulses are driving the Tory leadership contest: the desperate hunt for an election winner, and morbid fear of an election. Any tension between them is meant to be resolved by a Brexit miracle: the new prime minister releases Britain from European bondage on 31 October, and a thankful nation flings itself into outstretched Conservative arms.
It is always a mistake to expect gratitude from electorates. Voters see political pledges as a contract, not a favour, and they quickly move on to new demands. Labours victory in 1945 is the benchmark. If Winston Churchill couldnt bank a VE day dividend at the ballot box, there isnt much prospect of Boris Johnson getting one for some rickety Brexit bodge job.
The political map was simpler for most of the 20th century. In the 1955 election Labour and the Tories between them shared 622 out of 630 seats  99% coverage of the Commons benches. The equivalent tally now is 560 out of 650, and that score might flatter the big beasts. The 2017 general election result looked like a return to old-fashioned two-party politics against a prior trend of fragmentation. Subsequent polls, including recent council and European parliamentary ballots, suggest the decay of traditional allegiances has returned and accelerated.
Labour took Peterborough earlier this month with the lowest vote share ever recorded by a byelection winner. The Tories were barged aside by the Brexit party, which didnt exist a few months previously. Its boast to plucky newcomer status is a bit overblown, since it neglects Nigel Farages hardy perennial appearance in pretty much every campaign since the turn of the century. But that suggests his party wont evaporate when the sun rises on Britains first day outside the EU.
Farages mission is to hunt down betrayal of the true Brexit vision, and he will sniff it out in any compromise any government makes to manage an orderly withdrawal. A significant portion of Tory members and an implacable cadre of MPs share that bottomless appetite for anti-Brussels grievance, infused with paranoid millenarian nationalism. These are people who doubt even Michael Goves commitment to the leave cause. They are waiting for a Brexit rapture that no prime minister can deliver.
Such fanaticism drives moderate Tories to the Liberal Democrats who, along with the Greens, are capitalising on Labours Brexit incoherence. Plaid Cymru are doing the same in Wales. There is no sign of revival for Scottish Labour, bulldozed by the Scottish National party. Boris Johnson would sabotage what progress Ruth Davidson has made for the Tories in Scotland. Running Britain is a game of Commons arithmetic, and when numbers stack up as they do now, in multiple columns, it is trickier for the two main English parties to reach commanding heights.
It is an irony of Brexit that the ambition to detach Britain from Europe has made UK politics look more continental: a spectrum of parties, none of which can govern alone. But even a slender majority would produce unstable government because the parties themselves are dysfunctional families, always on the verge of irreparable estrangement. There are Tory MPs who find the prospect of being led by Johnson repugnant and Labour MPs who think Jeremy Corbyn is unfit to be prime minister. Those 