
EU leaders to spar over zero-carbon pledge for 2050
Diplomats think agreement unlikely at Brussels summit but bloc could signal intention to move towards towards target

Jennifer Rankin in Brussels


Thu 20 Jun 2019 12.24BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 12.25BST


European leaders will spar at their latest summit over how to tackle the climate crisis, with Poland and the Czech Republic leading a minority action against a net-zero carbon emissions target for 2050.
Meeting in Brussels, European leaders will debate the EUs role in tackling the unfolding climate emergency that threatens to significantly worsen the risks of drought, floods, extreme heat, poverty and destruction of wildlife around the world.
Diplomats think the EU is unlikely to agree a zero-carbon pledge for 2050 at Thursdays gathering, but are hopeful the bloc will signal it is moving in that direction, via its summit communiqu.
A draft seen by the Guardian states that the EU should advance work on the conditions, the incentives and the enabling framework to be put in place, in order to determine the transition to a climate-neutral EU by 2050 that will preserve European competitiveness, be just and socially balanced as well as taking into account member states national circumstances and right to decide on their own energy mix.
The language could also be added to the EUs five-year plan, which was criticised earlier this month for lacking urgency about the scale of the climate crisis.
A senior EU diplomat said the debate among member states had moved on significantly since earlier discussions in March, when countries were very divided. Poland and the Czech Republic are understood to be holding out against the 2050 target but Slovakia has dropped its opposition, splitting the central European Visegrd group.
We still do not have unanimity, but an overwhelming majority of member states, including member states you would never expect of being ready to accept such an objective are going in that direction, the diplomat said.
Other sources said it was unlikely the EU would agree a 2050 net zero emissions target, which is supported by at least 18 countries, including the biggest economies, the UK, France and Germany.
But diplomats hope the EU can make this pledge as part of a long-term strategy, which will be submitted to the United Nations in early 2020.
The EU, which likes to vaunt its green credentials, is under pressure to pledge a net-zero carbon emissions goal in 2050 before a crucial United Nations climate action summit in September. 
The UN secretary general, Antnio Guterres, wants the summit to put the world on a path to limiting global warming to 1.5C  a non-binding aspiration of the 2015 Paris accord.
Guterres wrote to European council president, Donald Tusk, last month calling on him demonstrate the leadership of the EU. I write to you today both as a G20 member and as a leader who I believe can bring the ingenuity needed to transform our economic systems and avert the negative impacts of a world with high levels of carbon emissions  from rising levels of pollution to costly natural disasters, he stated.
The letter calls for a change of course to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050 and specifies that leaders should curtail current coal-burning power stations and discontinue new ones beyond 2020.
Green campaigners are calling on the EU to make a clear 2050 pledge at Thursdays summit.
Weasel words wont defuse the climate emergency time bomb, Greenpeace 