5 Things You Should Know About Fallout 4
We found out that Fallout 4 was real last week, but at Bethesda’s E3 press conference, we got a great look at the game and everything new it adds to the tried and true experience. After watching cinematics and gameplay demos, its hard not to agree that this game looks absolutely killer. Here are the most important take aways from the most recent E3 info dumps.
1. Out this Year
Remember a time when a non-annualized, AAA game could be announced at E3 and released by year end? Before they would routinely get delayed a year or more, or head for a release date far away from Call of Duty’s? Bethesda brought us back to a simpler time when they announced that Fallout 4 would be hitting shelves this November. You won’t have to wait too long to return to the wasteland.
2. Pre-war Gameplay
In this installment, players will get a glimpse of the funhouse mirror world of pre-war America in Fallout. Plenty of stories have been told about how things were before the bombs dropped, but never have we really been active parts of the story before the calamity in games prior. At least in a prologue, character creation sort of sense, we will see the world as it used to be. No word on if there will be pre-war moments outside of the prologue.
3. Crafting
Tinkering with the metric tons of junk you come across in the wasteland is a huge part of Fallout 4. Weapons can be designed and customized to your liking. You can build suits of armor from scratch. You can even build appliances and structures to make a proper settlement. Building bigger and better settlements with more and more features will attract NPCs that will bring their skills to better your little community, Suikoden-style. It will also bring the attention of Raiders, looking to throw shade on your parade.
4. Console/Mod support 
Maybe the most surprising announcement of regarding the game didn’t even come from Bethesda. On Microsoft’s stage, Fallout designer Todd Howard dropped megaton bombshell: Mod support is coming to the Xbox One! As it wasn’t clear whether Xbox One players could actually mod the game from their consoles, it’s very clear that anyone playing on the console will be able to download mods made on with the PC version. Finally, couch players will get to experience the utter foolishness of the Bethesda game mod community.
Later, Howard would clarify that Fallout 4 mod support will also be available for the PS4, but at a later time.
5. Collector's Edition
Maybe the mother of all collector’s editions, Fallout 4’s extras include a real life Pip Boy to strap to your arm. Coupled with a mobile app that will act as a second screen while traversing a bombed out Boston, you have what is easily the closest you’ll get to the genuine article. The companion app will work regardless of if you prop it in this piece or not, but let’s get serious: are you not at least a little tempted?
Fallout 4 is shaping up to be the game we’ve been waiting for. To read more about everything there is to know about the game, come to the Official Wiki. Leave what you're most excited to see in the comments below, or tweet us @CurseGamepedia.
