NEWSFEED VIRAL
Melania Trump Wore a Jacket That Said 'I Really Don't Care' on It Ahead of Visit to Child Detention Center
By MEGAN MCCLUSKEY June 21, 2018
First Lady Melania Trump wore a jacket that read, “I really don’t care. Do U?” ahead of her unannounced visit to a child detention center in Texas, drawing criticism from those who saw the wardrobe choice as insensitive.

The First Lady’s spokesperson Stephanie Grisham said in a statement that there was no ill intent behind the First Lady’s outerwear.

“It’s a jacket. There was no hidden message,” Grisham said in a statement. “After today’s important visit to Texas, I hope the media isn’t going to choose to focus on her wardrobe.”

Melania was photographed wearing the controversial coat while boarding a plane at Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland, en route to the U.S.-Mexico border on Thursday. She was reportedly not wearing the jacket when she landed in McAllen, Texas. Melania made the visit just one day after President Donald Trump signed an executive order that would keep families from being separated while maintaining the administration’s “zero-tolerance” policy that would prosecute anyone who enters the country illegally.


“Today’s visit w the children in Texas impacted @flotus greatly,” Grisham later added in a tweet. “If media would spend their time & energy on her actions & efforts to help kids – rather than speculate & focus on her wardrobe – we could get so much accomplished on behalf of children. #SheCares #ItsJustAJacket”
However, the jacket has elicited strong reactions on social media in the wake of the outcry over the Trump administration’s zero-tolerance immigration policy.
Ivanka Trump's 'Clueless' Tweet Praising Oprah Winfrey's Golden Globes Speech Has Backfired
By CASEY QUACKENBUSH January 9, 2018
Praise is still pouring in for Oprah Winfrey’s address at the 75th Golden Globes, a rousing declaration that “a new day is on the horizon” for women and girls in light of recent public discourse about sexual misconduct. During the actress’s acceptance speech for the Cecil B. DeMille Award, Winfrey made a statement so powerful it elicited calls for her to run for president in 2020. But not all praise is created equal.

Ivanka Trump took to Twitter Monday to join the chorus, urging women and men to unite and say “times up,” referring to a Hollywood-led movement against harassment.
But the first daughter’s tweet drew instant scrutiny; her father, President Donald Trump, himself faces several accusations of sexual misconduct. Actor Alyssa Milano, comedian Rosie O’Donnell and model Chrissy Teigen were among the first and fiercest responders. Many called on her to use her money and influence to help bring about justice for the women who have accused her father of abuse.
Others claimed she was attempting to co-opt a social movement at the height of its popularity.
More still found her intervention hypocritical.
Michael Wolff, the author of an explosive new book about her father’s White House, called her out in a television interview.
But many were simply struck by the same question:
