‘Disappointed’ wives are divorcing ISIS thugs
Jihadists are finding that joining ISIS is detrimental to their married lives.

A growing number of the militants’ wives are filing for divorce as the terror group is driven out of territory it once controlled across large swaths of Iraq and Syria, according to NBC News.

Iraqi Deputy Justice Minister Hussein Jassem said there has been “a huge increase” in divorce requests in the last three months — with the vast majority filed by women.

While the government has not tracked the number of ISIS-related divorces, there has been a significant increase in requests in Sunni Muslim regions, including Anbar and Nineveh where the group was strong, he said.

One of the women, Umaima, met her future hubby, Awad, 13 years ago when he was a car mechanic – but he has since traded his automotive tools for a more lethal variety as a member of ISIS.

Umaima said Awad took the plunge into ISIS in 2014, four years after Iraqi security forces accused his brother of being a jihadist and fatally tortured him.

“My husband got mad and he swore he would take revenge on his brother’s killers,” Umaima told NBC News in a phone interview from Fallujah, providing only her first name.

Awad has been arrested and faces life in prison or a death sentence if convicted.

Umaima, 41, who has three children aged 6 through 12, decided to dump their dad even though her community looks down on divorced women.

After all, there also is a stigma of being linked to ISIS in Iraq.

“Being the wife of a terrorist is not honoring me or my family and it is not going to honor my kids,” the single mom said.

“I was and still am disappointed because I married a man who didn’t appreciate his life and decided to join a terrorist group instead of taking care of his family,” she said, adding: “I will try to be their father as well.”

Some conservative Sunni Muslim communities frown at divorce, but it is accepted by many in Iraq and is not considered a sin under Islam.

Iraqi women may file for divorce on a variety of grounds, including if their husbands mistreated them or were convicted of crimes.

Applicants must provide evidence supporting their claims, such as sworn statements from witnesses. A case doesn’t require a lawyer, is usually inexpensive and a decision is typically made within a month.

One judge in Mosul, a former ISIS stronghold, reported that dozens of women were now trying to end their marriages every week, Belkis Wille of New York-based Human Rights Watch told NBC News.

Another woman seeking a divorce is Fatima, who said she was surprised when her husband joined ISIS after serving as soldier in the Iraqi army before the 2003 US invasion.

Her husband, Omar, was arrested three years ago after the liberation of the city of Tikrit.

“I am afraid of being accused that I support terrorism, and this is one of the reasons that drove me to ask for divorce,” Fatima, 35, said.