Wall Street sees major growth potential for Luckin in untapped Chinese coffee market
KEY POINTS
Up 5% since its initial public offering in May, Luckin Coffee has garnered quite a few favorable ratings from firms that see opportunity for the Beijing-based coffee chain in a growing Chinese coffee market.
Luckin’s opportunity in China is “one of the world’s greatest retails growth opportunities,” according to KeyBanc Capital Markets, which has an overweight rating on the stock and a $22 price target.
Luckin is attempting to overtake Starbucks as the largest coffee chain in China.
Beijing-based coffee chain Luckin Coffee is catching the eye of Wall Street analysts who are hoping the newly public company’s technology-driven business model will fuel growth in an underpenetrated coffee market in China.
Luckin, which is the second-largest coffee chain in China, soared nearly 50% on its first day of trading on the Nasdaq in May. Despite the stock being down slightly since then, it has garnered quite a few favorable ratings from Wall Street.
Since Luckin was founded less than two years ago, the company has sold more than 110 million cups of coffee, according to Keybanc Capital Markets. Luckin has opened 2,370 stores in its lifetime and plans to add 2,500 in 2019. More than 90% of its stores are smaller “pick-up” shops designed in close proximity to its customers. Luckin says technology is the core of its business. The company uses big data analytics and AI to analyze its customers behavior and transaction data.
Its self-developed mobile apps have given Luckin “significant advantages in cost and customer engagement to drive mass market coffee consumption in China” according to Credit Suisse, which has an outperform rating on the stock and a $24 target price. The stock ended the week just above $18.
Similar to other fresh IPOs like Lyft, Uber, and Beyond Meat, Luckin is not yet a profitable company. In 2018, the chain reported net sales of $125.3 million and a net loss of $241.3 million. However, Needham expects the coffee chain’s profit to break even in the third quarter of 2019.
Needham’s Vincent Yu has a buy rating on Luckin Coffee and a target price of $27. China’s untapped coffee market
Luckin’s opportunity in China is “one of the world’s greatest retail growth opportunities,” according to KeyBanc Capital Markets, which has an overweight rating on the stock and a $22 price target.
In a tea-dominated culture, coffee is a “highly underpenetrated” market in China, said Credit Suisse.
Coffee sales in China are expected to grow significantly in the next few years, according to market research company Frost & Sullivan, which is cited by many of the analysts covering Luckin.
“We forecast per capita consumption of freshly brewed coffee to accelerate from 1.6 cups per/year per capita in 2018 to 5.5 cups per capita per year in 2023,” the research firm said.
The market has grown from 15.6 billion yuan in 2013 to 56.9 billion yuan in 2018, and is estimated to reach 180.6 billion yuan in 2030. This growth represents a 25% compound annual growth rate from 2018 to 2023, according to Frost & Sullivan.
