Horizon: Zero Dawn is an upcoming post-apocalypse open world action role-playing game (RPG) being developed by Guerrilla Games. The game will be released on February 28, 2017 on Playstation 4, the game is set in a lush, beautiful open world where nature has reclaimed the ruins of a forgotten civilization. It is a world where mankind is not the dominant species, and highly advanced machines sit at the top of the food chain. You play as Aloy, a young outcast from a tribal society, who has learned to hunt the machines. Intent on unraveling the many mysteries that surround her, Aloy embarks on a quest that will lead her to discover her own destiny.
Along the way, Aloy will face off against an entire menagerie of machines – some traveling in herds, others roaming in solitude, all of them presenting a formidable danger. You will need to learn their behaviors, attack patterns and weak points in order to survive. You must use the beautiful environments to your advantage, and employ stealth, agility, and cunning to approach your prey unseen.
Of course, you won't be hunting unarmed in Horizon Zero Dawn. Aloy is capable of combining natural materials with machine parts to turn them into ingenious weapons, ammunition, traps, and tools. By cleverly using the right items at the right moment, you can exploit weak points and bring down even the largest machines. Unfortunately, the most dangerous machines aren't necessarily the biggest...
Features
A Lush Post-Apocalyptic World: How have machines come to dominate this world, and what is their purpose? What happened to the civilization here before? Scour every corner of a realm filled with ancient relics and mysterious buildings in order to uncover your past and unearth the many secrets of a forgotten land.
Nature and Machines Collide: Horizon Zero Dawn juxtaposes two contrasting elements, taking a vibrant world rich with beautiful nature and filling it with awe-inspiring highly advanced technology. This marriage creates a dynamic combination for both exploration and gameplay.
Defy Overwhelming Odds: The foundation of combat in Horizon Zero Dawn is built upon the speed and cunning of Aloy versus the raw strength and size of the machines. In order to overcome a much larger and technologically superior enemy, Aloy must use every ounce of her knowledge, intelligence, and agility to survive each encounter.
Cutting Edge Open World Tech: Stunningly detailed forests, imposing mountains, and atmospheric ruins of a bygone civilization meld together in a landscape that is alive with changing weather and a day/night cycle.
The Frozen Wilds
The expansion for the game, Horizon Zero Dawn: The Frozen Wilds, was released on November 7, 2017. It features Aloy venturing into The Cut, the outskirts of Banuk territory, to investigate rumors of a daemon affecting the machines.