
'He never hit her in front of me again'  Donna Ferrato's domestic abuse photos
As two exhibitions of the photojournalists work open in Madrid on her 70th birthday, Ferrato recalls some of the most powerful images in Holy  a retrospective spanning nearly 40 years
by  Guy Lane


Thu 20 Jun 2019 07.05BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 07.23BST


For nearly four decades, the photojournalist Donna Ferrato has documented the effects of domestic violence on abused women and their families. Her book and series Living with the Enemy is one of the most important works on the subject.
She launched a campaign in 2014 called I Am Unbeatable, which features women who have left their abusers.
In 1981, Ferrato was commissioned by Playboy magazine in Japan to document the supposedly hedonistic lifestyle of Elisabeth and Bengt, a couple of New Jersey swingers. Ferratos pictures told a different story  the most famous of which, below, is included in Time magazines 100 most influential images of all time.
Here, she tells the stories behind some of the most potent images in the collection.
Bengt Hits Elisabeth, 1982
This is the moment that changed my life. It changed Elisabeths life. I dont know what it did to her husband  I dont think he cared at all. But for the two of us women, it changed our lives. Id never seen a woman being hit; I didnt grow up with violence. I didnt know he would ever hit her, Ferrato said.
Late that night, I heard her screaming. I picked up my camera and went running to the bathroom. This was the very first picture I took in that room. When he went to hit her again, I grabbed his arm and said: What are you doing? He said: Im just disciplining her because she is my wife and she is lying to me.
Philip Jones Griffiths, my then partner and president of Magnum photos, said: Donna, Ive never seen anything like this, just keep doing it. Keep going.
I continued to spend time with them. He never hit her in front of me again. She became strong and got him out of her life after one more near-fatal incident.
Six-year-old child Diamond shouts at his father as the police arrest him for domestic violence, Minneapolis, 1986
People are always very shocked by this. You dont see that many pictures that have this level of real content to them: the boy is saying: I hate you for hitting my mother, and dont you ever come back to this house. Even the cops had never seen that. And Id never seen a child stand up to his abusive father. That blew my mind. The mom hadnt called the cops  the boy called the cops. He had just shown the police where his father had hidden the screwdriver.
It was pitch dark at nine oclock in the morning, I was bouncing the flash off the ceiling  I didnt even know how to bounce flash, but I was experimenting. Thats shooting in the dark  thats like Jedi shooting!
Soldier getting ready for guard duty during the Gulf war, Hafar al-Batin, Saudi Arabia, 1991
I went to Saudi Arabia to document women who were fighters, soldiers. She was cleaning her gun before going on duty that night. Shes doing her job. But this caption is my opinion  that its every womans right to serve, protect and 