Meanwhile Barbie Has a Career As a Robotics Engineer Who Wears Flats Now and #MeToo Has Implicated 414 High-Profile Executives and Employees in 18 Months
By MELISSA LOCKER 
June 26, 2018
Barbie has a brand-new job. In the latest iteration of the beloved toy’s “Career of the Year” line, Barbie is has taken up a career as a robotics engineer.
The iconic doll comes with all the tools of her new trade, designed with the help of real-life robotics engineer, Cynthia Breazeal, an associate professor of media arts and sciences at MIT and founder of the social robot company Jibo, Inc. Robotics Engineer Barbie comes with a doll-sized laptop computer, a tiny robot with moveable arms, and accessorizes her casual look with safety goggles. It’s also worth noting that the doll has swapped her high heels for sensible flats to make it easier to work in a laboratory all day.
Furing her nearly 60 years in the workforce, Barbie has racked up a very diverse resume. Robotics engineer is a new career choice for her, though. It’s part of a growing list of jobs Barbie has undertaken in science, technology, engineering, and math, including as a computer engineer, astronaut, and video game developer.

It’s all part of Barbie’s ongoing evolution from plastic fashionista to ambitious, science-loving role model, becoming a toy for little girls dream of careers in STEM or perhaps being a robotics engineer when they grow up. Mattel isn’t just letting girls play with dolls and dreaming of careers, though. They teamed up with Tynker, an online platform that provides coding classes to children, to teach aspiring robotics engineers some of the skills necessary to make their dreams a reality. They are offering seven free “Barbie-inspired” coding lessons that will focus on logic, problem-solving, and other skills that a potential robotics engineer will need.
The brainy Barbie, who comes in four skin tones, is available online for $13.99.

Harvey Weinstein in New York on Feb. 10, 2016. Private equity firm Lantern Capital emerged as the winning bidder for the Weinstein Co.
 
Charles Sykes— Invision/AP
By JEFF GREEN / BLOOMBERG 
June 25, 2018
At least 414 high-profile executives and employees across fields and industries have been outed by the #MeToo Movement in 18 months, according to data collected by a New York-based crisis consulting firm.
The study looked at national news articles that singled out people for sexual harassment or other similar misdeeds, said Davia Temin, whose firm Temin & Co. did the research. Individuals with at least seven separate, national mentions were included. That includes celebrities like Bill Cosby and Louis CK, but the vast majority are corporate executives and business leaders like IntelCEO Brian Krzanich, who resigned late last week after revelations of an affair with an employee.
Among the 414 people accused, 190 were fired or left their jobs. Another 122 have been put on leave, suspended or are facing investigations since December 2016. For about 69 people, there were no repercussions. In recent months, the rate of accusations has been slowing but the percentage of people being fired has increased, Temin said.
“It started to become a tsunami, certainly after Weinstein, and it sparked other stories in the same industry and then across all industries,” Temin said. “I think it’s settled into a new plateau, but it is certainly higher than we’ve ever had before.”
Only eight of the people, like Kraznich, were said to be involved in consensual relationships. Out of the 414 people accused, all but seven are men. Much of the behavior is related to incidents that may have happened a long time ago but surfaced now as tolerance has dropped and it’s become more newsworthy.
“The eagle eyes are out for this,” Temin said. “Women understand a little better their collective power, and they’re using it.”

