
Don't give up! How to stay healthy, happy and combative in impossible political times

Don't give up! How to stay healthy, happy and combative in impossible political times
Walk the dog, let go with a cry, head to the gym or have sex. Leading campaigners on how to look after yourself before heading back into the fray

Ammar Kalia


Thu 20 Jun 2019 06.00BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 07.04BST


Every week it seems there is something new to protest about. If we are now in the Anthropocene age  where human effects on the globe take precedence over nature  we are also in the age of activism, one of protesting against our damaging impact on the world. This dissent has moved beyond the fringes of political engagement to packing our streets with people and placards bearing slogans that range from seeking to stave off climate change to stopping Donald Trump and staying in the EU. Protests are increasingly taking in wider age ranges and demographics, too, but for those grassroots organisers for whom this is a long-term mission, the toll of such responsibility can be a heavy one.
Activism comes with all the stresses of any job  long hours, office politics and overflowing inboxes. Couple this with the fact that activism is in a sense defined by its marginality and the job sits firmly between a rock and a hard place. How, then, do activists stay motivated when the odds are against them?
Bill McKibben, environmentalist and authorTry to spend a little time outdoors, whether it is in a city park or out in the woods or mountains. One of the things we are fighting for is a world where nature still has some place and so its good to get out and remind ourselves of that. I try to get outside every day, just for a few minutes. If I can just see the sky, thats good; sometimes I only want to see the stars for a few minutes and that makes me feel worthwhile.
Eve Ensler, playwright and feminist activistIt is important to realise that the struggle is long, so you have to take care of your body. You have to have pleasure, joy and humour in your life, otherwise you just become bitter and full of sadness. Nature is critical, dance is critical, sex is critical.
Pleasure is what fuels us. Sometimes when we are doing this work, it can feel like we are not allowed to feel anything but pain, yet having done this work for a long time, if you want to keep going you need to have joy, as thats what will keep you motivated to go back.
Bisi Alimi, LGBT activistI can get a lot of online abuse for the work that I do, as well as often seeing a lot of trauma from fellow LGBT people who reach out to me. That used to give me very intense anxiety. I have started going to the gym regularly for my mental health and sometimes, when I am really angry, I will go to a boxing class, which helps me get it out of my system. This allows me to see whatever has upset me less personally. I go to the gym five times a week and I also run at least twice a week, so every day I am doing something active that allows me to disconnect.
Harry Gay, founder 