Where’s Phil Jackson? Gardening in Montana, apparently
No one has heard much from Phil Jackson in a while.

But according to one of his former players, Jackson isn’t shedding any tears over his 11 NBA championship rings as a coach, nor is he losing sleep over his 80-166 record compiled during the three years Jackson was Knicks president.

Knicks president Steve Mills asking for more patience »
“I talked to Phil the last couple weeks, a couple times. He’s really enjoying Montana right now,” said Ron Harper, one of Jackson’s players on the Michael Jordan-led Bulls teams that won three straight titles from 1996-98. “He was in Los Angeles for a little bit, then went back home to Montana. I talked to him right before the NBA Draft. He told me he’s watching his green grass grow. He’s gardening now. I said, ‘You’re gardening?’ He said, ‘Yes, I’ve got my own garden now.’”

Jackson arrived in New York in March, 2014, with great fanfare and was given $60 million by Dolan, despite having no prior experience as an NBA front office executive. It’s one thing to coach teams when the likes of Jordan, Scottie Pippen, Kobe Bryant and Shaquille O’Neal are playing for you. Quite another to come to a franchise with a petulant, micromanaging owner (Dolan), and a years-long losing culture.
Jackson’s reign as Knicks president was nothing short of disastrous. One of his last fingerprints on the club is 2017 draft pick Frank Ntilikina, who has largely been a bust. Harper, however, believes Jackson had some positive achievements while in New York.

“The thing I tell folks is (Jackson) got a bad deal. When he asked to trade Carmelo (Anthony), everybody got sour. Then they fire (Jackson) and turn around and make the trade. So I guess (Jackson) was right in some aspect of what he (did),” said Harper. “People don’t really understand that the Knicks were over the salary cap before he got here. Giving Jerome James and other players all that big cash. Then (Jackson) got them under the salary cap. Nobody wants to talk about that.”

Harper said Jackson still wants to work in an NBA front office again, despite what many perceive as an epic fail as Knicks president. If Jackson’s health will allow it and if a team is willing to hire him, the Zen Master could make a return. Maybe to Los Angeles, where he won five rings coaching the Lakers?

“I told him that wouldn’t be a bad place for him to go back to. But he said right now he wants to just be relaxing, enjoy himself and take his time,” said Harper, who was a guest at Mariano Rivera’s charity golf event Monday at Winged Foot Golf Club. The event benefits White Plains Hospital and Rivera’s foundation.

As for the Knicks, Harper said he has no idea if Kevin Durant would sign with the club if he opts out of his contract with the Warriors this summer to become a free agent. The star player ruptured his Achilles during this year’s playoffs and is expected be out for the entirety of next season. If he remains with the Warriors, he will collect $31 million next season.

“Durant’s a very interesting piece of the pile. What I would do if I were Kevin Durant, knowing I’m not going to play next year — that $31 (million) really sounds good to me,” said Harper. “I’d take that $31 million, sit my ass at home, watch a lot of TV.”