This Picture of Geoffrey the Giraffe Waving Goodbye Is Upsetting Lots of Toys 'R' Us Kids and Amazon Wants You to Start a Business As a Package Delivery Driver
A picture of Geoffrey the Giraffe leaving Toys “R” Us is pulling on the heartstrings of former Toys “R” Us kids as the chain closes for good Friday.

Former employee Rene Johnpiere posted the photo Wednesday of Geoffrey the Giraffe, the popular mascot of the franchise, with a suitcase waving goodbye in the middle of an empty aisle of a Toys “R” Us. The image has been shared more than 300,000 times and has left many online feeling nostalgic and heartbroken.

People have turned to social media to express their sadness.
The toy store opened its doors 70 years ago. At its prime, it was the go-to location for kids to get the newest dolls, gadgets and toys. In 2017, Toys “R” Us filed for bankruptcy and in March 2018 the company announced it was going out of business and closing all U.S. stores.

Toys “R” Us posted a goodbye message on it website, encouraging its former customers to “play on.”

“Thanks to each of you who shared your amazing journey to (and through) parenthood with us, and to every grandparent, aunt, uncle, brother and sister who’s built a couch-cushion rocket ship, made up a hero adventure, or invented something goeey. Promise us just this one thing: Don’t ever grow up. Play on!”
Amazon’s ever-expanding retail empire is going to need more workers and vehicles to get millions of packages to shoppers’ doors. To do so, the web retailer is encouraging people to start their own delivery businesses.
For those in the U.S. willing to strike out on their own in the service of the e-commerce giant, Amazon will offer financial and operational support, the Seattle-based company said in a statement. Startup costs can be as low as $10,000 and they will get access to discounted trucks, uniforms, fuel, insurance and other resources, Amazon said.
Amazon has been working on ways to expand delivery capacity, from leasing its own cargo planes to experimenting with drones. It’s also working on ways to move merchandise directly from merchants to consumers to avoid overwhelming its own warehouses with inventory, according to documents reviewed by Bloomberg. While Amazon has long relied on the U.S. Postal Service, United Parcel Service Inc. and FedEx Corp., it has also sought to gain more control over the logistics of package delivery, using its own technology and data-crunching abilities as well as facilities and transport to move packages around more efficiently.
“Customer demand is higher than ever and we have a need to build more capacity,” Dave Clark, Amazon’s senior vice president of worldwide operations, said in the statement.
Those who succeed in the new delivery program can earn as much as $300,000 in annual profit by operating a fleet of as many as 40 delivery vehicles, according to Amazon. They will be able to build their businesses knowing that Amazon will provide shipment delivery volume and give them access to “sophisticated delivery technology,” the company said.
It’s also offering military veterans who qualify $10,000 in reimbursements to get their own delivery business started.
Amazon has employed independent contractors in the past to handle packages, especially during busy holiday shopping periods. Individuals can also sign up for a program called Amazon Flex to deliver merchandise using their own vehicles, earning $18 to $25 an hour. With the new startup initiative, the online store will be able to boost its shipment capacity while putting Amazon-branded vehicles and uniforms on the streets.

