Sevin Rosen venture capital partners splitting up
 

Four Silicon Valley partners of 
Sevin Rosen Funds, a tech-focused venture capital firm, will 
not join their Dallas partners to raise a new investment fund, 
one partner from each group said on Friday. 

Sevin Rosen -- which is known for backing huge successes 
like Compaq Computer Corp and Electronic Arts ERTS.O but has 
struggled to make big hits on recent investments -- is the 
latest in a handful of highflying VC firms that have recently 
shelved funds or seen partners scatter to other firms.  John Jaggers, Sevin Rosen's Dallas-based managing partner, 
said he plans to raise the firm's next fund in the second 
quarter, but refused to disclose details except to say it would 
be roughly the size of its previous fund, which was $300 
million.  The separation at Sevin Rosen came after a tumultuous 
process lasting 15 months, said Steve Dow, one of the Silicon 
Valley partners who are now listed as "partners emeriti" on the 
firm's Web site.  In October 2006, Sevin Rosen decided not to close its tenth 
fund and returned between $250 million and $300 million of 
capital already committed to it, citing a saturated VC market 
and a "weak" exit environment.  These external factors, coupled with irresolvable debates 
on the right investment strategy, led to the separation, Dow 
said.  "There were lots of questions on the VC industry changing 
and should we go big or small," he said.  There were differences over whether the firm should do 
bigger deals, focus on specific areas or invest globally, Dow 
added.  Dow said he now plans to invest mostly his own money in new 
ventures. Another partner, Nick Sturiale, is joining the 
venture capital arm of private equity giant Carlyle Group  CYL.UL.  Jaggers and other venture capitalists said such breakups 
were part of the natural wear and tear of an industry adapting 
to change and does not foretell a slowing of fund-raising.  "I see this more as part of the natural cycle of things," 
said Jaggers. He said a few of Sevin Rosen's original partners 
left in the 1980s, while others stayed on to raise new funds.  Mobius Venture Capital, which backed companies like 
VeriSign Inc ( VRSN.O ) and E*Trade Corp ( ETFC.O ), and Worldview 
Technology Partners are among others to have canceled funds 
recently.  Partner turnovers and breakups are inevitable in an 
industry dominated by "very strong-willed personalities -- they 
have egos, you're always going to see people not making it, 
like marriages," said Mark Heesen, president of the trade group 
National Venture Capital Association.  "But there are about 740 other VC firms that are not" 
breaking up, he added.  The rise of global opportunities, especially in the 
emerging markets of China and India, is creating spirited 
differences of opinion between those venture capitalists who 
want to raise large global funds and those who prefer to focus 
regionally, said Paul Gompers, a professor of business 
administration at Harvard Business School.  "It's definitely a harder business today than it was eight 
to 10 years ago, and you have to be patient," said Gompers.