Street-topping Wal-Mart upbeat on holiday

 CHICAGO  (Reuters) - Wal-Mart Stores Inc. ( WMT.N ) posted a better-than-expected 11.5 percent rise in quarterly profit on Tuesday, helped by strength in its international business, and said deep discounts would drive better holiday sales, sending its shares higher. 

 The world's biggest retailer gave a fourth-quarter profit forecast that was at or below Wall Street expectations but said recent price cuts on items such as toys and electronics were already drawing shoppers. "They definitely threw down the gauntlet with their comments on aggressive pricing," said Sarah Henry, an analyst with Sovereign Asset Management, which owns Wal-Mart shares. Net income rose to $2.65 billion, or 63 cents per share, in the third quarter that ended October 31, from $2.37 billion, or 57 cents per share, a year earlier. Results in the latest period include a 1-cent-per-share insurance gain related to last year's hurricanes. Analysts, on average, expected earnings of 60 cents per share, according to Reuters Estimates. Wal-Mart said on October 5 that profit would probably be in the range of 59 cents to 63 cents per share. Sales rose 12 percent to $83.54 billion, with international sales up nearly 34 percent, helped by acquisitions. Wal-Mart posted lackluster sales growth at its U.S. stores open at least a year, hurt by disruptions from store remodeling efforts and a poor reception for its trendier clothing. Chief Executive Officer Lee Scott said third-quarter U.S. sales were softer than planned, but holiday season price cuts should boost fourth-quarter demand. "This season, no one will doubt Wal-Mart's leadership on price and value," he said. BACK TO BASICS Joseph Beaulieu, an analyst with Morningstar, said Wal-Mart's refound focus on cutting prices was a positive after a year of talking about adding higher-end merchandise to get wealthier customers to buy more than just food. "Wal-Mart is...getting back to what's made them work in the past," he said. "The way they're toning down the talk about fashion and talking more about discounting, that's the kind of thing that makes that store tick." The retailer forecast fourth-quarter earnings from continuing operations of 88 cents to 92 cents a share. Analysts on average expected 92 cents, according to Reuters Estimates. On a recorded message detailing third-quarter results and fourth-quarter plans, Scott said specials such as a $398 laptop computer sold out quickly, and he vowed the "most aggressive pricing strategy ever" for the holiday season. Wal-Mart's closest rival, Target Corp. ( TGT.N ), posted a strong 16 percent jump in quarterly profit on Tuesday, and called Wal-Mart's cost-cutting efforts "business as usual." Beaulieu said Target is somewhat sheltered from Wal-Mart's aggressive holiday discounts because their stores cater to wealthier shoppers and are concentrated in the U.S. north rather than Wal-Mart's power zone in the south. "I think Target can do well in a quarter that Wal-Mart does well," he said. "In a quarter when Wal-Mart and Target both do really well, other retailers could get hurt." Wal-Mart expects fourth-quarter sales at its U.S. stores open at least a year to be up 1 percent to 2 percent. Wal-Mart had previously forecast flat same-store sales for November, so the quarterly forecast suggests stronger growth in December and January. In the third quarter, the U.S. discount stores posted 7.8 percent total sales growth, with operating income up 9.9 percent. Sam's Club sales were up just 1.9 percent, hurt by falling prices for gasoline sold at its filling stations, while operating income rose 4.1 percent. The international division posted an 18.1 percent jump in operating income for the quarter. Shares of the Bentonville, Arkansas-based company rose $1.21, or 2.6 percent, to $47.53 in morning New York Stock Exchange trading. The stock is up slightly year-to-date and trades at 14.4 times analysts' profit forecasts for next year, compared with a multiple of 16.3 for Target.