Weekend Wrapup: 14/Oct - 20/Oct
posted on 2012-10-22 15:01 UTC-8 by Jon Hayward
This week we have the first Evangelion 2.0 trailer, the possibility of a new Shinichiro Watanbe series and a pile of manga announcements from NYCC;

The first trailer for Evangelion: 3.0 You Can (Not) Redo (Evangelion Shin Gekijo-ban Q) 
has been streamed on niconico. This will be the third film in Hideaki Anno 
and Khara's four film remake of Gainax's Neon Genesis Evangelion 
and the film will open in Japan on the 17th of November.

A interview with writer Gen Urobuchi revealed that the staff of Puella Magi Madoka Magica 
are considering a new television series after the third film. 
He added that he would like to bring in new writers for another series 
and that "I think the story should outlive it's creators". 
Urobochi had recently revealed elsewhere that the all-new plot 
of the third Madoka film meant that it was not the end of the Madoka Magica story. 
Gekijo-ban Maho Shojo Madoka Magica [Shinpen]: Hangyaku no Monogatari 
(Puella Magi Madoka Magica the Movie New [Arc]: Rebellion [Story]) will open next year.

MAAPA, a new anime studio headed by MADHOUSE founder Masao Maruyama, 
confirmed that it is currently working with director Shinichiro Watanabe 
(Macross Plus, Cowboy Bebop, Samurai Champloo, Kids on the Slope) 
on an original television anime series. However there is no broadcast 
timeframe scheduled for the new series.

New York Comic Con (NYCC) happened last weekend and there was many 
title announcements for upcoming manga, so here's a few of the standout 
announcements which you will see over the coming year.

Kodansha Comics acquisitions.
•	Sankarea: Undying Love By Mitsuru Hattori - June 2013
•	No. 6 By Atsuko Asano and Hinoki Kino - June 2013
•	Tokyo Mew Mew a la Mode By Mia Ikumi - November 2013 (previously published by Tokyopop)
•	The Sailor Moon Art Book - new publication with select artwork from the five 
Japanese art books from creator Naoko Takeuchi. 
The book will additionally include previously unpublished art pieces 
and be released worldwide.

Viz acquisitions
•	Tiger & Bunny manga Vol. 1 - April 9, 2013
•	Rurouni Kenshin: Restoration By Nobuhiro Watsuki - Spring/Summer 2013
•	Dragon Ball and D.Gray-man will be released in three-in-one omnibus editions next year.

Yen Press acquisitions
•	Puella Magi Oriko Magica By Chloe Mura
•	Puella Magi Kazumi Magica - The Innocent Malice By Takashi Tensugi
•	K-ON! High school By kakifly
•	K-ON! College By kakifly
•	

And Yen Press are collaborating with Square Enix to publish the company's 
english language manga titles digitally worldwide. 
This will include Black Butler, Soul Eater and Pandora Hearts. 
The Square Enix Members website will still host the manga, 
but Yen Press will additionally distribute the titles digitally worldwide from Winter 2012.

And finally, Madman Entertainment has started streaming Chunibyo demo Koi ga Shitai! 
on their Screening Room. New episodes are added every Thursday.
