$12 Gets You A Heap Of Steam Games, Including Conan Exiles
One of the best deals in PC gaming.
Last updated by Chris Reed on July 13, 2018 at 1:54PM
Humble has begun gradually revealing its next bundle of games for its Humble Monthly subscription service. More games are generally revealed later in the month, with the full bundle revealed once subscriptions for that month have been closed off. This month's Humble Monthly will close for new subscribers on August 3.
Revealed so far for the August Humble Monthly are A Hat In Time, The Escapists 2, and Conan Exiles--all of which unlock immediately when you subscribe, usually as Steam codes. That's already a value of nearly $90. Seeing as a Humble Monthly subscription costs $12 per month and more games will be revealed later, that adds up to one of the best deals in gaming. And unlike some other subscription services, you get to play and keep the games forever, even if you cancel your Humble Monthly subscription.
July's Humble Monthly ended up offering nine games, including Portal Knights, Hearts of Iron IV, Blackwake, and more. June's was particularly appealing, totaling eight games, including Destiny 2 and Yooka-Laylee. The full value of any given month is usually around $200.
Humble throws in extra bonuses for Humble Monthly subscribers as well. All active subscribers get 10% off every game on the Humble Store. They also get access to the Humble Trove, a collection of mostly well-received indie games they can download and play any time. And if you subscribe for a full year, you save $12 off the monthly rate and (for a limited time) you get $25 added to your Humble Store account. Plus, 5% of Humble's proceeds go to charity.
All in all, Humble Monthly is one of the best deals in PC gaming. And with three well-received games being the early unlocks for August, now is a great time to get started.
Some links to supporting retailers are automatically made into affiliate links, and GameSpot may receive a small share of those sales.