DIGITAL HEALTH BRIEFING: Amazon, Berkshire, JPMorgan crown CEO of health venture — Salesforce targets payers with CRM suite — Breach exposes 270,000 patients' records
Welcome to DIGITAL HEALTH BRIEFING, the newsletter providing the latest news, data, and insight on how digital technology is disrupting the healthcare ecosystem, produced by Business Insider Intelligence.


CORPORATE GIANTS NAME CEO OF HEALTH VENTURE: Amazon, Berkshire Hathaway, and JPMorgan Chase have appointed Dr. Atul Gawande as the head of their newly formed healthcare company — which was announced in January 2018 with the lofty goal of lowering the cost of healthcare in the US. Employers bear the brunt of rising healthcare costs: US employers contributed more than $13,000 per covered worker with a family health plan in 2017, according to Kaiser Family Foundation estimates. That’s up about 60% from 2006. With more than one million combined employees, the corporate trio has a strong incentive to reduce healthcare spending.

Dr. Gawande’s appointment could provide some insight into the possible avenues the partnership will explore. Gawande brings a background in surgery and a focus on improving the delivery of care to the partnership. Perhaps most indicative of the joint venture's future endeavors is Gawande's role as founding executive director of Ariadne Labs, a Boston-based innovation lab focused on improving the delivery of care of serious illnesses, childbirth, and surgery — three areas that have a significant role in employer-based healthcare spending.

Given Gawande's background, here's what the new company might explore:

Treating chronic illnesses and delivering end-of-life care. Chronic illnesses are already the biggest strain on the healthcare industry, accounting for 86% of the $2.7 trillion spent in annual health care costs in the US in 2014 alone. That’s set to rise as the US stares down an expanding aging population.
Improving childbirth delivery. Gawande could apply his expertise from Ariadne Labs to reduce preventable pregnancy-related spending, such as the use of medically unnecessary cesarean sections, which adds billions in avoidable healthcare spending each year.
Avoiding unnecessary surgeries and medical tests. Gawande has been an outspoken proponent of reducing unnecessary medical tests and surgeries. In his writing, Gawande pointed to a Walmart-sponsored program that found that about 30% of the spinal procedures employees were told they needed were inappropriate.