
Carmageddon: its killing urban life. We must reclaim our cities before its too late
Land Rovers latest ads would have us believe that gas guzzlers contribute to urban culture. They do exactly the opposite
Contact author


Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.10BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.18BST


What is the best way of wrecking a city? Pour cars into it. Heavy traffic, 50 years of research shows, breaks up communities, disrupts social life and crushes local cultures. Noise drowns out conversation and drives people indoors. Pollution makes streets inhospitable. Cars take up the space that might have been used for children to play, adults to meet, and local projects to grow.
Street life is treated as an impediment to traffic. In cities all over the world it has been cleared for cars. Stalls, hawkers, football and cricket games, old people playing dominoes, chess or ptanque: all must make way for the car. So much land is required for driving and parking that there is little left for human life. In cities like Barcelona that curb traffic, cars use about 25% of the urban area. In cities like Houston that dont, they use 60%. The car eats the public space that could otherwise become parks, cycle lanes, markets and playgrounds.
The fashion for SUVs is one of the two main reasons for rising road deaths among pedestrians
Land Rovers new advertisements for its Range Rover Evoque create the opposite impression: that this ridiculous gas guzzler contributes to urban culture. The Evoque is marketed as the Range Rover for the city, which sounds like a contradiction: SUVs like this were originally designed for dirt roads in the countryside. But now, according to the agency behind this revolting campaign, we are invited to use it to explore your city and create your own urban adventures.
One of the ads features the supermodel Adwoa Aboah driving through Brixton, staring at the interesting street life as if on a human safari and talking about its amazing soul and rhythm  People here are real. It gives the impression the car is passing through market streets where traffic is prohibited. Why? Because these are the places with the most amazing soul and rhythm.
She also drives down Brixton Road, one of the most polluted streets in London. All the Evoque models have higher nitrogen oxide emissions than the average for new cars (and much higher CO2 emissions). The Evoques sole contribution to Brixtons streetlife is likely to consist of accelerating the deaths of some of the real people it passes.
Air pollution is now believed to kill more people than smoking. Across Europe its estimated to cause the premature deaths of 800,000 people a year. Every week, cars here kill far more people than the entire toll of the Chernobyl disaster. Air pollution damages hearts and lungs, causes a wide range of cancers, and damages the health of unborn children. It can radically reduce intelligence, as a result of oxidative stress and neurodegeneration. So along comes Land Rover, not only promoting a polluting SUV as a city car, but suggesting it should be used for fun: to kerb-crawl through congested streets gawping at the human zoo.
SUVs are killing machines: because they are higher and heavier, you are more likely to die if you are hit by one than if you are struck by an ordinary car. The fashion for SUVs is one of the two 