Goat Simulator Wiki

This is your goat. There are many like it, but this one is yours.
Pilgor the Goat may look like an ordinary goat, but she is actually the de facto monarch of goat. She is considered by many to be a dumb-as-a-rock harbinger of Hell and glitches, and roughly 50% of non-goat outsiders hate her for having reportedly barged into their houses, licked them, headbutt them, run into their cars, etc. . She resides in Goatville, though has been spotted on many occasions at Goatville High and Goat City Bay.

Controls
Goats are incredibly versatile, psychotic animals. They have many skills from generations of instinct, including:

Goats are always moving around, which is why they have four legs instead of two. Press W, S, A, or D to move. Use Left Stick on Xbox.
Goats can also look where they are going. Move the mouse to move the camera. Use Right Stick on Xbox.
Does that fence dare to keep you penned in? Show it who's boss by jumping over it! Press Spacebar to jump. Press A on Xbox.
And then punish the fence for its insolence by smashing it to pieces with your thick skull. Left-click to headbutt. Press RT on Xbox.
Celebrate your hard-earned freedom by sprinting through the town. Hold Shift to run.
Goats have sticky adhesive everywhere on their tongues for licking things. Press E to lick with your tongue. Press X on Xbox.
A crate is sneaking up behind you to avenge the fence's death! Press S plus left-click to kick with your hind leg. Pull Left Stick towards you and press RT on Xbox.
The goat language is incredibly nuanced and takes years (or even decades) to master, with even the most applied linguists cannot speak the ancient tongue of goat. Press 1 to baa. Press RB on Xbox.
Now that you've mastered jumping, why not try out some aerial acrobatics? Hold right-click and press W, S, A, or D in the air to spin. Hold RT and Left Stick on Xbox.
Sometimes a goat just needs to relax and lie down. Press Q to ragdoll. Press B on Xbox.
Some walls are too high to jump over, but not too high to run up. Hold Shift to sprint, then press Spacebar to jump onto the wall and hold W to do a wall run. Press Spacebar again to do a wall jump. Use Left Stick to run, and press A to jump and do wall jumps on Xbox.
Especially talented goats can walk on their front legs. Press W then S to manual, then repeatedly press W and S to keep your balance. Push Left Stick in front of you and then toward you to manual, and the same to balance on Xbox.
Goats always try to land on their feet. Press Spacebar just as you hit the ground to stick the landing and earn extra style points. Press A when you hit the ground on Xbox.
Goats can pretend to be in Baywatch by literally changing how time and space works. Press F to activate Slow Motion. Use left on the D-Pad on Xbox.
Rumors tell of especially powerful goats who have learned special abilities. Press R to use a mutator's ability. Use Y on Xbox.
Other goat facts
Goats are incredibly durable and can fall from great heights, be struck by moving vehicles, or even explode without being harmed.
Goats are heralds of chaos, and leave destruction in their wake. Don't feel bad about it; it's just the nature of being a goat.
Goats are always fashionable, and are especially fond of hats.
There are many kinds of goats that don't look like goats, but don't be fooled, because as the saying goes,"If it's not a human, it's a goat."
Many goats have genetically mutated, often with abnormal appearance and (sometimes) a special ability.
Goats have a monarchic society, and are ruled by a queen. Legend has it whomever sits on the throne of skulls becomes the ruler of all goatkind.
Goats have religion just like we do. They believe in angels, devils, and gods.
Goat makes an official appearance in the platform fighting game, Indie Game Battle.

Goat's render in Indie Game Battle
Nobody knows the origin of goat, but some say he was made in a office.