After decades-long legal battle, Caspian Sea opens to tourism
#Travel
(CNN) — Tired of the Caribbean? Called at every Mediterranean port? Bored of the Alaskan fjords and the Baltic capitals?
An entirely new body of water may soon be open to intrepid cruise fans seeking new horizons.
The only issue: It's a landlocked sea surrounded by some of the world's most cloistered countries. But for many travel adventurers, this will be part of the appeal.
Besides its fame as the main source of prized black caviar, the Caspian Sea is the world's largest inland body of water.
In fact, for a long time, not even the five countries that share it -- Azerbaijan, Russia, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Iran -- could agree on whether it is a lake or a sea.
But with the decades-long dispute over its legal status resolved, the sea is now open to luxury cruising.
Sea or lake?
The question of whether the Caspian is a lake or sea is about more than just semantics.
Before the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, only two countries bordered the Caspian Sea: Iran and the USSR.
For the 27 years that followed, the five countries that now had a claim to these resource-rich waters were locked in a dispute over its status.
There's plenty at stake: It's home to caviar-producing sturgeon (although fishing is currently subject to a conservation-led ban) and there are estimated reserves of around 50 billion barrels of oil and 290 trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
If the Caspian's a sea, then international law states that the seabed would be divided according to each country's coastline. That would benefit Kazakstan, with the longest shoreline, but disenfranchise Iran, which has the shortest.
If it's a lake, however, then the seabed would be divided equally.
In August 2018, leaders from the five nations met in the Kazakh coastal city of Aktau to sign a landmark deal which grants each country 15 miles of sovereign waters, a further 10 nautical miles of fishing area, and then common waters beyond.
The Caspian now has special legal status, so that it has still not been declared lake or sea. The question of how to divide subsoil territory has been put off for now, but what it does mean is that the waters are now open for new tourism opportunities, including cruising.
A versatile ship
A brand new cruise ship, the Peter the Great, is currently under construction in Astrakhan, a Russian port city at the mouth of the river Volga.
The ship will have 155 cabins and capacity for 310 passengers and is expected to launch this summer, although specific dates have not been announced and itineraries are not yet on sale.
Its operator, the Moscow River Shipping Company is said to be planning one- and two-week itineraries around the Caspian Sea, calling at ports in Azerbaijan, Russia, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Iran.
The dimensions and design of this 141-meter by 16.8-meter ship will also make it possible for it to move through Russia's network of internal waterways. This means that it'll not be confined to the Caspian and will eventually be able to reach the Baltic and Black Seas.
Although no sailing program has been made official, reports in the Azerbaijani and Russian media indicate that the ship will alternate the Caspian cruises in winter with river itineraries along the Volga and between Moscow and Saint Petersburg in the summer. It may also conduct cruises in the Black Sea, along the Russian coast and all the way to Georgia and to the Turkish city of Trabzon.
It's likely that it will be the first of several new cruise offerings, though there is still work to be done on tourism infrastructure in the region as a whole.