No room on water, no home on land for Cambodia's ethnic Vietnamese

Ethnic Vietnamese are the largest minority group in Cambodia and most are stateless as they are not citizens in Cambodia or Vietnam.
Truong Van Long is Vietnamese in name only. He was born in Cambodia and has lived there for decades, including many years in a floating house on the Tonle Sap lake where he still lives.

But his days on the water are numbered.

Citing concerns over pollution and overfishing last year, Cambodian authorities have moved hundreds of ethnic Vietnamese families in the central province of Kampong Chhnang to land.

More than 1,000 ethnic Vietnamese families, including Truong Van Long’s, who are still on the water will be relocated to land in the coming months, provincial authorities have said.

"Why move us from the water? We are not in anyone’s way, and there is nowhere else for us to go," said Troung Van Long, seated on the floor of his blue-colored houseboat.

"The officials say we are polluting the water, but it is industries and city people who do that. We just want to make a living from fishing - we will starve if we are moved," he told the Thomson Reuters Foundation.

Ethnic Vietnamese are the largest minority group in Cambodia, comprising nearly 50,000 families, or more than 180,000 people, according to government data. Human rights groups say the figure is about four times higher.

Most are stateless, as they are not citizens in Cambodia or Vietnam, and face "significant barriers" in accessing education, health care, formal employment, banking services, freedom of movement, and owning property, the United Nations said.

"They did not choose to make their houses on the river; it was forced upon them by their dire circumstances and lack of rights," said Butmao Sourn, executive director at non-profit Minority Rights Organization (MIRO) in Phnom Penh, the capital.

"They do not have the legal right to buy property, so they live on the water in fragile homes, exposed to the elements and to health risks. They are not better off on the land either, because they are not welcome there," he said.

Cambodian authorities say relocation of the floating communities is necessary to address overfishing and illegal fishing, water pollution and damage to the lake’s ecosystem.

"They can’t live on the water permanently. They need to settle on land," Chhour Chandoeun, governor of Kampong Chhnang province, said on the phone.

"Many families have already moved voluntarily. We are building suitable infrastructure for everyone," he said.

Heightened risk 

Cambodia shares its eastern border with Vietnam. Waves of Vietnamese migration took place during the French colonization starting in the 19th century, according to historians.

After Cambodia gained independence in 1953, new laws gave some "aliens" in the country the right to apply for naturalization. But these laws were subsequently tightened.

With the Khmer Rouge take-over in 1975, tens of thousands of ethnic Vietnamese were expelled or executed, their documentation and property confiscated or destroyed, according to human rights groups.

After the fall of the Khmer Rouge regime in 1979, thousands of Vietnamese returned to Cambodia. Many made their home on the Tonle Sap.

But their legal status and living conditions have remained insecure, said Christoph Sperfeldt at the University of Melbourne’s center on statelessness.

"Ethnic Vietnamese groups have lived in Cambodia throughout contemporary history. Yet many communities are marginalized in society, with little access to services and development opportunities," he said.

Around the world, up to 15 million people are not recognized as nationals by any country. They are at a "heightened risk of exploitation, human trafficking, arrest and arbitrary detention", according to the U.N. refugee agency (UNHCR).

Southeast Asia’s porous borders, intertwined histories and different levels of prosperity have long driven people to move.

Cambodian authorities began issuing permanent resident cards in 2015 to ethnic minorities for a fee of 250,000 riel ($62) each. It must be renewed after two years, and holders are eligible for nationality after seven years.

But "insisting on legal identity requirements for accessing rights and services could have the effect of further excluding the most marginalized, who face serious impediments to obtaining a legal identity," said Sperfeldt.

Cambodian government spokesman Phay Siphan said the permanent resident cards will ensure that ethnic Vietnamese have legal status to stay in the country.