
Teen wrestlers, sci-fi road trips and lesbian vampires: the brave new world of trans film

Teen wrestlers, sci-fi road trips and lesbian vampires: the brave new world of trans film
San Franciscos Frameline43 festival highlights the evolution of trans lives onscreen  from bigotry to complex reality
Veronica Esposito


Thu 20 Jun 2019 06.30BST


Things are tense. The 18-year-old who left home to find herself in the big city has just had her first lesbian encounter concluded with a savage bite to the neck. Turns out that her sexual partner is a vampire, and now shes a vampire too. Will she take the antidote and go back to being human, or will she embrace eternal life and a diet of blood? Its a tough choice but the fact that years ago she made a different kind of transition makes things easier.
Welcome to the brave new world of trans film. Once dominated by misunderstanding, exoticization and bigotry, transgender film has evolved to explore the complex realities of trans lives. The films offered at San Franciscos Frameline43  one of the largest LGBT film festivals in the world  showcase just how far trans movies have come.
Film is essential for sharing our stories. With a 2016 BuzzFeed News/Ipsos poll finding that trans people occupy as little as 3% of the population of most developed countries, much of the cis world still views us through popular media depictions. And at a time of increasing violence against trans people, this understanding is essential to our safety.
One major flash point over trans inclusion has been in sports, which Michael Barnetts documentary Changing the Game tackles head on. It follows Mack, a transmasculine teen wrestler forced to compete in the womens league, as well as the teenagers Sarah and Andraya, transfeminine athletes fighting to play as women. Barnett gives the athletes ample space to share their experience, while also exploring the many ways that the cis world complicates their simple request to compete with other boys and girls.
Its clear that Mack has no desire to wrestle those who arent his gender. The film poignantly shares his struggles to compete with all his heart, even when facing the impossible double-bind of being denounced as a fake male while also called a boy who unfairly beats up on girls. Talking heads on Fox News and other cable channels deride Mack for pumping testosterone to get an unfair advantage.
Macks, Sarahs and Andrayas needs as transgender athletes are butting up against institutions whose conception and evolution never took into account the possibility of transgender competitors, and much of Changing the Game is about how these institutions are trying  and not trying  to respond to this challenge. It deftly discusses many sides of the complicated situations that it investigates  the only thing that really feels missing is an airing of what, if any, advantage transgender athletes may have over their cisgender counterparts.
Other films in the Frameline program tread so lightly that audiences may not even realize theyre watching trans actors. Bit is a fun vampire flick that follows Laurel (Nicole Maines), a trans teen, as she leaves the nest to explore adult life in Los Angeles. The typical coming-of-age story is given a twist when Laurel is initiated into a group of edgy young female vampires  instead of going out to party and have sex, shes going out to party, have sex, 