Markets can cheer: China appears to finally be addressing its US trade surplus
KEY POINTS
Beijing is turning the trade leaf: Its merchandise trade surplus with the U.S. is down at an annual rate of 10% in the first four months of this year. On current trends, that surplus could fall 24% in 2019.
A friendly Trump-Xi meeting is likely during the G-20 summit in Osaka, Japan later this month.
The Fed is maintaining its extraordinarily easy credit stance with an astounding $1.4 trillion of loanable funds in the banking sector.
China will not allow the U.S. to interfere in its legislative process and economic policies, but it seems to be showing a readiness to keep its sales in American markets on a steep and steady downward path.
According to data released June 6 by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Chinese goods exports to the U.S. in the first four months of this year declined 12.8% from the same period of 2018, driving the trade surplus down 10%.
Although Chinese data released Monday morning point to a widening Chinese surplus on U.S. trade in the course of May, that wasn’t directly comparable to U.S. figures because of differing methodologies. Regardless, the trend of more balanced trade will — and must — continue if Beijing wants to return to normal trade relations with Washington.
Indeed, the signal is clear that China has decided to operate a radical change in its U.S. trade. Taken at an annual rate, China’s trade surplus with the U.S. in the January-April interval would be 23.5% below China’s surplus for all of last year
It is a great pity the U.S. and China missed a chance to initiate such a rebalancing trend of their bilateral trade accounts when the Trump administration took office in January 2017.
China’s leaders were warned during the U.S. presidential campaign in 2015 and 2016 that Donald Trump, if he became president, would not tolerate excessive and systematic Chinese trade surpluses on their U.S. trades. As the saying goes, China could read the writing on the wall.
China’s finally made a wise move
Why Beijing decided to aggravate its trade case with a $901.7 billion merchandise trade surplus during the tenure of an administration virulently opposed to such trade developments is a mystery.
Washington, therefore, could be forgiven for seeing such Chinese policy behavior as a brazen provocation that required a strong American response. And that’s what the U.S. did by building a trade complaint including intellectual property violations, forced technology transfers, illegal industry subsidies, non-tariff trade barriers, restricted access to American firms on Chinese markets, Beijing’s exchange-rate manipulations and more.
Briefly put, China found itself in a situation where the U.S. called for far-reaching legislative changes in Beijing and closely scrutinized monetary policies as conditions for balancing U.S.-China trade accounts and a continuation of fair, free and reciprocal trade relations.
And as China balked at Washington’s demands — while continuing to accumulate nearly a trillion dollars of U.S. trade surpluses on Trump’s watch — America stepped up pressure with trade tariffs, adopted an increasingly firm negotiating stance and limited access to U.S. markets and technologies for Chinese companies.
By appearing to ignore Washington’s trade warnings, China just made things difficult for itself. Beijing is now doing, under duress, what it should have done three years ago under much more favorable conditions, if it genuinely wanted to promote its policy of harmonious “great power relations.”
It is, therefore, pleasing to read the reported comments, made last Friday, by Chinese President Xi Jinping at an international economic forum in Russia: “It’s hard to imagine a complete break of the United States from China or of China from the United States. We are not interested in this, and our American partners are not interested in this. President Trump is my friend and I am convinced he is also not interested in this.”
