Anne Happy/Unhappy Go Lucky! Comedy Anime's 1st Promo Video Streamed
posted on 2015-12-30 05:40 UTC-8 by Rafael Antonio Pineda

The official website for Anne-Happy/Unhappy, the television anime adaptation of Cotoji's Unhappy Go Lucky! comedy manga began streaming a promotional video for the anime on Tuesday. 
The video previews the show's main cast and characters.

The site unveiled a new visual for the anime.
The anime's main cast includes:
Yumiri Hanamori as An Hanakoizumi
Alias: Hanako / Birthday: 12/31 / Blood Type: O / Unhappiness Type: Bad Luck
She's a trouble maker who has bad luck every aspect of her life. 
Despite this, she doesn't seem to worry and is very positive. 
Although she loves animals, they hate her. 
The only thing she worries about is her lack of breasts.

Haruka Shiraishi as Ruri Hibarigaoka
Alias: Hibari / Birthday: 07/09 / Blood Type: B / Unhappiness Type: Tragic Love
Her caring and good personality gets her caught up in many unhappy encounters with those who drag her into calamities. 
She has been attracted to a "certain person" to no avail for a long time. 
Because both of her parents are currently on assignment abroad, she's living alone. 
She is very good at cooking.

Kiyono Yasuno as Botan Kumegawa
Alias: Botan / Birthday: 02/23 / Blood Type: A / Unhappiness Type: Bad Health
Has an unusually weak constitution, to the point that her bones in her fingers will crack from only shaking hands. 
As the daughter of a doctor, she is very familiar with medicine. 
Because she gets injured so much, she is like a one-woman life-saving hospital ward who treats herself on a daily basis. 
Although she is a gentle princess type person who Smiles a lot, she is very negative when it comes to herself.

Hibiku Yamamura as Hibiki Hagyu
Alias: Hibiki / Birthday: 04/01 / Blood Type: O / Unhappiness Type: No Sense of Direction
She has such a terrible sense of direction that it takes her three hours to commute to school alone. 
She loves her childhood friend, Ren, as her "Number 1." 
Because of her unyielding personality, she can't admit that she has no sense of direction. 
Additionally, she becomes very hostile toward every female who approaches Ren.

Mayu Yoshioka as Ren Ekoda
Alias: Ren / Birthday: 10/10 / Blood Type: AB / Unhappiness Type: Trouble with Women
She's a girl, but she has a troubling condition where females of any species are indiscriminately attracted to her. 
She plays the "straight man" to her childhood friend Hibiki. 
She always has very little energy and finds most things bothersome. 
If given the chance, she will take a nap.

Shin Oonuma (Baka and Test - Summon the Beasts, C³,Fate/kaleid liner Prisma Illya, WATAMOTE) 
is directing the anime at the studio SILVER LINK. 
Hitoshi Tanaka (Go! Princess Precure) is in charge of the series scripts, 
and Miwa Oshima (Baka and Test - Summon the Beasts, C³, GJ Club, Shin Koihime Muso) is designing the characters 
and serving as chief animation director.

The story centers around class 1-7 of Tennogofune Academy, where all the students 
with "bad karma" or misfortune seem to have been gathered. 
Hibari, a student in this class, meets the unlucky Hanako and the perennially unhealthy Botan on her first day of school, 
and together they try to find a way to turn their school life into a happy one.

Cotoji (No-Rin: Petit) launched the manga in Manga Time Kirara Forward magazine's February 2013 issue, 
which shipped in December 2012. 
Houbunsha published the fourth compiled book volume of the manga on July 13. 
North American publisher Yen Press licensed the manga and will publish it under the title Unhappy Go Lucky!
