Aksys Games to Release Death Mark, Code: Realize ~Wintertide Miracles~, Stardust Galaxy Warriors: Stellar Climax Games
posted on 2018-07-07 09:32 UTC-8 by Crystalyn Hodgkins

Aksys Games announced at its panel at Anime Expo on Friday that it will release the Death Mark, Code:Realize ~Wintertide Miracles~, 
Stardust Galaxy Warriors: Stellar Climax, and Ghost Parade games. 
Aksys Games listed Code:Realize ~Wintertide Miracles~ and Ghost Parade as coming in 2019, 
and Death Mark and Stardust Galaxy Warriors: Stellar Climax as "coming soon."

The company also announced the September release date for the Jake Hunter Detective Story: Ghost of Dusk game. 
The game will ship for the Nintendo 3DS with both physical and digital releases.

Aksys Games will release the Death Mark (Shiin) horror game on Playstation 4, 
PlayStation Vita, and Nintendo Switch, in both physical and digital editions.

The game is set in a Tokyo suburb that has lately seen many bizarre deaths. 
All those who have died bear a "mark" on their body, 
and urban legends swirl about these marked people, 
with some saying they were cursed by spirits to die. 
Players take the role of one such marked person, 
and choose another character and fellow marked person as a partner. 
The protagonist and partner must visit haunted locations and find clues to unravel the mystery of the mark before they die.

The game shipped for PS Vita in June 2017, and then launched on the PS4 on January 18. 
The game's Switch version launched on June 28. 

Aksys Games will release Code:Realize ~Wintertide Miracles~ (Code:Realize ~Shirogane no Kiseki~) 
for PS4 and PS Vita in both physical and digital editions. 
The game is the second fandisc for the Code:Realize ~Guardian of Rebirth~ game.
The game launched in Japan on December 31, and features returning characters as well as the new characters Cantarella, Miles Strand, and Aiguille.

The original Code:Realize ~Guardian of Rebirth~ game shipped in Japan for the PS Vita in 2014. 
Aksys Games released the original game from Idea Factory and Design Factory in North America and Europe in October 2015. 
Aksys Games also released the Code:Realize ~Future Blessings~ (Code:Realize ~Shukufuku no Mirai~) fandisc on March 30 for PS Vita. 
Aksys Games released the Code:Realize ~Bouquet of Rainbows~ PS4 game on the same day, 
which included both the original game and the Future Blessings fandisc. 
The Future Blessings fandisc originally launched in Japan for the PS Vita in November 2016.

The game's anime adaptation premiered last October. Crunchyroll streamed the series as it aired and Funimation is offering an English dub.
Aksys Games will release Stardust Galaxy Warriors: Stellar Climax for the Switch on the Nintendo eShop. 
The game's PS4 launch trailer is below.

Developer Dreamloop Games describes the game:
SGW: Stellar Climax is an engaging 1-4 player couch co-op action shooter game, combining SHMUP and Brawler-like gameplay with light RPG elements. 
Choose from different game modes, gameplay settings, mechs, weapons and upgrades to customize your experience freely. 
Soar through space, defeat evil and save the future... from itself!
Dreamloop Games released the game on Steam in November 2015. 
The company released the game on PS4 and Xbox One in September 2016.

Aksys Games will release Indonesian developer Lentera's 2D side-scrolling Ghost Parade game for PS4, Switch, and PC via Steam. 
The game will have both physical and digital editions.
