Francesco Totti is considering offers to become a director at Sampdoria and Fiorentina after resigning from his position at Roma in an emotional press conference. 

The Roma legend has ended a 30-year association with Roma after revealing he had been ostracised by club consultant Franco Baldini and president James Pallotta. 

The 42 year-old turned down an offer to remain at Stadio Olimpico as technical director, saying that leaving the club 'is like dying' and admitting it was a day he hoped 'never would have come'.
'I sent an email to say something that felt unimaginable. I wrote my resignation. I was hoping this was not necessary, but the fateful day has arrived, which for me is very ugly and painful,' he said.

'Considering the conditions, it was only right that I made this brusque decision, especially as I never had the chance to work on the technical area with Roma.

'I thought long and hard. Let's just say it was not my fault that I had to make this decision.
'They knew my intentions and what I wanted, to give so much to this club and team, but they never wanted me to, in all honesty. They excluded me from every decision.'

In front of a large media contingent Totti confirmed: 'another club owner wants to put their trust in me', and it is believed the offer has been submitted by Sampdoria. 

According to Sky Sports Italia and La Gazzetta dello Sport, Sampdoria president Massimo Ferrero first contacted Totti a month ago. 

'At this moment, there are many things I can do. I am evaluating, calmly, all the offers on the table and the one that makes me feel happiest, I'll give it my all from the heart.
'I am not here to point the blame towards one or the other. We had started a journey, it was not respected, so I am moving on,' Totti added.

'I won't be left unemployed. I received some offers from Italian clubs, including one this morning. I take everything into consideration, because I am free.

'Juve or Napoli, let's not go wild here… No, out of respect for Roma, I wouldn't do that. I mean stuff like FIFA, UEFA, etc.

'Some things I read first in the papers and then I found out from Roma, so imagine how much they kept me informed.'