Face it: It’s creepy to put facial recognition technology in schools
Earlier this month, the school system in Lockport, N.Y. (pop.: 20,569), near Niagara Falls, became the first in the nation to begin testing facial recognition technology, much to the consternation of state education officials and the New York Civil Liberties Union. Their concern is justified.
Aside from the fact that the technology will cost the school district nearly $4 million, one has to ask what exactly a public school system expects to accomplish with facial recognition. No one denies the safety of students and faculty is of utmost importance, but measures aimed at keeping them secure should be based on a myriad of factors including actual risk, and in conjunction with local police departments and other law enforcement agencies.
Safety ought to also include the ability of students and faculty to preserve their privacy and civil rights. With so many cyber intrusions reported almost on a daily basis, the personal information and images of innocent people — in this case, many minors — should not be put at risk, if indeed there is even a remote possibility that students’ images could be captured and stored.
Then there is the practical aspect of the technology itself.
In the case of Lockport, whose entire K-12 student population is a modest 4,600, the school superintendent told the The Buffalo News the testing phase of its facial recognition program “will use photos of registered sex offenders from a national database for comparisons to images of people entering the schools.” 
But would it not be wiser and more prudent for Lockport to evaluate its overall security plan, and examine its schools’ points of ingress and egress? And if it is such a target of potential intrusions, why would it take matters entirely into its own hands instead of handing everything over to police?
Moreover, facial recognition is only as good as the database available. Lockport’s test phase will mine the sex-offender registry, but what about other criminals known to be violent, and those whose past transgressions would pose a more real threat to the lives of those in a school, such as former and current students? In my many years in law enforcement, I can’t remember a single incident of a sex offender entering a school.
Our public schools should not be the testing ground for facial recognition technology; it would be far more prudent to use it as part of an overall security program in places such as offices and houses of worship. Indeed, citizens of Lockport might be better served if the $3.8 million tab for its public school facial recognition program was transferred to the police department, where there would be better monitoring and accountability. 
It is essential that we temper our use of untested new technology. There is currently much debate about whether the negative aspects of facial recognition outweigh the positive, and we must understand that moving too quickly might have irreversible and unintended consequences.
It was encouraging that the state Assembly introduced a bill in its last session that would impose a one-year moratorium on the use of facial recognition in schools. Legislators would be wise to advance this bill when the legislature reconvenes, and promptly send it to Gov. Cuomo for his signature.