NYC teachers union honcho ousted in office sex scandal: sources
A burly teachers’ union official with a taste for naughty behavior has been fired for carrying on messy sexual trysts with junior staffers, sources say.
Former United Federation of Teachers Political Director Paul Egan, a political powerbroker whose influence once extended from lower Manhattan to Albany, was let go from his high-flying post Feb. 15 amid jealous accusations hurled by one of his spurned paramours, according to sources with knowledge of the matter.
Egan, 52, who worked in city schools before joining the UFT more than a decade ago, first grabbed headlines after city officials accused him of encouraging his students to cheat on standardized exams in 2001.
In 2011, he made the news again for throwing a fit during a boozy lobbyist dinner in a swank Albany bistro, claiming the quail he was served — and finished — wasn’t a generous enough portion, sources said.
Police were called to quell the quail fracas, but Egan still held onto his high-paying gig.
A source familiar with Egan’s final ouster said that he had been carrying on a passionate inter-office affair with a comely UFT lawyer.
The couple used UFT cell phones to sext and office computers to relay saucy photos of each other. The relationship soured, according to the source, when Egan started some sex-tracurricular activities with another union staffer.
The two-timed lawyer went to union officials with the information about her affair and the lurid pics on union equipment, prompting them to fire Egan for his philandering.
 “They found the photos on the UFT equipment,” the source said.
Egan, who earned a salary of $192,102 in 2018 plus $25,757 in expenses, according to union filings, didn’t respond to requests for comment.
He was a seventh-grade teacher at Bronx Intermediate School 113 when he allegedly left the answers to 11 questions near the pencil sharpener in his classroom in an attempt to boost pass rates on a citywide math exam, according to the special schools investigator.
 “Teacher Paul Egan used several different methods to cheat,” the investigator reported.
The probe found he would tell students before a test to sharpen their pencils — and then depart, leaving the answers to the first 11 questions near the sharpener.
“Don’t tell anyone that I helped you or you’ll be the ones who get into trouble,” one student quoted Egan as telling the class.
But one girl ratted Egan out to her mother, who told school officials.
Lawmakers said the incident should’ve been enough to cost Egan his job.
But Egan held onto his city paycheck until 2005 when he joined the union as a special representative.
He was promoted quickly in the union, earning four promotions over the next decade, according to his LinkedIn profile.
He was working as the UFT’s Director of Legislation & Political Action when his next brush with notoriety occurred in an alcohol-fueled banquet at Albany’s posh Marché bistro in 2011.
Big-eater Egan got rowdy while ringing up nearly $2,000 on dinner and drinks at the posh restaurant, which is now closed.
A patron at the bistro said restaurant staffers complained that the UFT group took up three tables in the the outrageous dinner involving the portly rep and 24 union comrades.
The liquored-up educators “were yelling and screaming the whole night,” a source said at the time.
After devouring his quail dinner, Egan — who was listed in the 1990 Guinness Book of World Records for the longest after-dinner speech — began yelling about the small portions in his three-course prix fixe meal, and refused to pay the group’s bill.
When the owner couldn’t calm him down, cops were called. The restaurant eventually chopped the group’s bill from $2,000 to $1,500.
Reps for the influential teachers’ union, which represents roughly 118,000 current members, confirmed Egan’s departure to the Daily News this week but wouldn’t give a reason.
Founded in 1960, the UFT is a local division of the 1.4 million-member American Federation of Teachers and wields a powerful political force across New York, often serving a foil to Gov. Cuomo and friend to Mayor de Blasio.
News of Egan’s departure prompted confusion among the union’s membership.

