Siren Visual acquires Fractale and Princess Jellyfish
posted on 2012-11-11 23:29 UTC-8 by Jon Hayward
Australian distributor announces that Princess Jellyfish and Fractale will be joining Tiger & Bunny for release in February. Un-Go to be released late Jan;

The announcement was made through Siren Visual's website, 
however the exact date of the releases are not yet available.

Princess Jellyfish
Amamizukan is a female-only apartment complex housing a group of NEETs. 
Tsukimi is one of the tenants who has an obsession with jellyfish, 
however her life and the lives of her neighbours start to change 
with the sudden arrival of Kuranosuke Koibuchi, 
a cross-dressing illegitimate son of a local politician.
This 11 episode series was produced by Brains Base for Fuji TV's Noitamina 
block under the direction of Takahiro Omori (Durarara!!, Baccano!) 
with series direction and scripts by Jukki Hanada (Level-E, Yozakura Quartet, Rozen Maiden). 
The series was originally broadcast in 2010 
with Kana Hanazawa (Mato Kuroi in Black Rock Shooter) as Tsukimi 
and Mitsuki Saiga (Rossiu in Gurren Lagann) as Kuranosuke. 
You can view the announcement here.

Fractale
Fractale is set in a world where mankind's stability and prosperity 
is handled by the "Fractale System" a network that consists of several trillion computers. 
Living on a rocky island, Clain is a young boy facinated by old technology, 
he helps a girl names Phryne who in turn gives him a pendant and dissapears. 
When Clain accesses the data on the pendant, he summons a girl-shaped avatar named 
Nessa who starts a journey with Clain to discover the truth behindFractale.
Fractale was created for Fuji TV's Noitama block in 2011 
based on a original story by Hiroki Azuma. The 11 episode series 
was produced by A-1 Pictures under direction by Yutaka Yamamoto (Kannagi, Lucky Star) 
with a script by Mari Okada and art direction by 
Emi Kesamaru (Black Rock Shooter, Lucky Star). The announcement can be seen here.

Tiger & Bunny
Sternbild City is a city of Heroes, couragous men and women with a mutation 
called "Next" that grants them superhuman powers. 
The heroes that make the grade are sponsored and publicly displayed on HERO TV 
as they compete to capture criminals and protect the citizens of Sternbild. 
A veteran hero, Wild Tiger is forced to work with rookie hero Barnaby Brooks Jr 
as Sternbild's first super hero team-up, however with Next related incidents on the rise 
and Barnaby unravelling a conspiracy involving his parents death 
their first team-up will be anything but smooth.
Sunrise handled production on this 25 episode series that was last seen in Australia 
streaming here on ANN in conjunction with Siren Visual. 
Keiichi Satou (Karas, C for Control) directed the series which was designed 
and scripted by Masafumi Nishida. 
The original designs were created by Masakazu Katsura (Iria - Zeiram the Animation) 
with additional character design by Kenji Hayama (Giant Robo, The Big O) 
and Masaki Yamada (Appleseed (movie), Bubblegum Crisis 2040) 
and mechanical design by Kenji Andou (Karas (OAV), Origin ~Spirits of the Past~). 
You can view the announcementhere.

Un-Go
While not an acquisition, the Un-Go DVD release was delayed from August 
to allow a dub track to be added to the title. 
Now Un-Go will be released on the 24th of Jan, 2013.
