
Boris Johnson could be prime minister in a month. Is Labour ready to take him on?


Thu 20 Jun 2019 12.57BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 13.38BST


The nation watches this strange array of men deranged enough to aspire to run a country in an insoluble crisis of their own making. As a despairing and departing chancellor spells out today at Mansion House, they all lie through their teeth: there will be no new EU deal, they will be stopped from leaving with no deal, they will not keep their wild tax-cutting promises  and they know it.
Yesterday they ejected the only one who tiptoed closer to these truths, but Rory Stewart also swore blind he would Brexit, come what may.
We watch aghast at the grisly choice, outraged again at being excluded from electing our own prime minister. Our fate is left to a rabble of extreme rightwing revolutionary Tory members who will tear up everything in pursuit of an abstract ideological phantasm. They may look like deceptively normal Rotarians and golf-club members, pillars of their communities, but YouGov finds them eager to wreck the union: 63% glad to see Scotland go, 59% waving goodbye to Northern Ireland in order to see Brexit take place. But most astoundingly, nearly two-thirds of this erstwhile natural party of government are quite sanguine if their Brexit does significant damage to the UK economy.
Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell feature strongly in these Tory debates as mortal hazards facing the nation  looming Marxists ready to turn us into Venezuela. But in this world turned upside down, nothing ever proposed, planned, desired or dreamed by Labours left, nothing in its natonalising manifesto, ever matched these Tory Maoists-on-speeds willingness to wreak significant damage on us all.
There never was a more open goal for Labour, as day after day the effects of a decade of malevolent maladministration tumble out. On Wednesday, on just one ordinary news day, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) reported UK teachers have the heaviest workloads, bar Japan. The head of NHS England found the 10% cut in hospital beds has been too many (who knew?). The number of rough sleepers in London reached a record high. The Resolution Foundation found 18- to 29-year-olds spending money has fallen 7% since 2001 while the over-65s has risen 37% over the same period.
Labour should be stratospherically ahead in the polls. Instead, its 14% showing in the EU elections, behind the Lib Dems and only just beating the Greens, shows Brexit blows away everything else, trumping old party loyalties. Pointing to austeritys devastations doesnt summon back those lost Labour votes.
Fence-sitting has been calamitous: YouGov shows Labour has lost half its 2017 general election votes  a third to remain parties and 11% to Brexit parties. As the YouGov founder Peter Kellner points out, an average of the last years polls shows a national swing  with 44% backing leave and 56% remain. This is partly demographic (older, mainly leave, voters are dying while pro-remain teenagers reach voting age) but crucially the swing to remain is bolstered by Labour voters in the north and Midlands changing their minds.
The shadow cabinet meeting on Wednesday responded slower than a slug, while Labour members agitate frantically for a rapid response U-turn. A report presented, purporting to show backing remain would lose more seats than fence-straddling, has been forensically dismantled 