Please tell me! GALKO-chan Promo, Additional Cast Unveiled
posted on 2015-12-26 04:30 UTC-8 by Karen Ressler

Takahiro Sakurai, Daisuke Ono, Yoshitsugu Matsuoka, more join cast
The official website for the anime adaptation of Kenya Suzuki's 
Please Tell Me! Galko-chan (Oshiete! Galko-chan) manga revealed additional cast 
and staff members, a second key visual, and a promotional video on Saturday. 
The two-minute promotional video and its 30- and 15-second versions 
preview the opening theme "YPMA?GIRLS" performed by the main cast.

The newly-announced cast members include:
Takahiro Sakurai as Charao
Daisuke Ono as Supoo
Yoshitsugu Matsuoka as Otao
Juri Kimura as Nikuko
Ayaka Suwa as Iincho
Shizuka Ishigami as Agemi
Kaede Hondo as Yabana
Yuko Iida as Okako
Yuna Yoshino as Ouji
Ai Kakuma as Metako
Yurika Kubo as Fushigi-chan
Eri Suzuki as Budoko
Makoto Furukawa as Bomuo
Taku Yashiro as Norisuke
Kohei Amasaki as Konta
Kentaro Kumagai as Hakase
Yusuke Kobayashi as Futsuo
Taishi Murata as Netoro
Yuichi Nakamura as Abesen
Yukiyo Fujii as Kuseta
Saori Onishi as Tsunno
Sayaka Senbongi as Kibami
Mamiko Noto as Narrator

The three main cast members are, from left to right in the image to the right:
Miyu Tomita as Otako
Azumi Waki (The IDOLM@STER Cinderella Girls' Sanae) as Galko
Minami Takahashi (Food Wars! Shokugeki no Soma's Megumi Tadokoro) as Ojyo

Keiichiro Kawaguchi (Psychic Squad, Hayate the Combat Butler, OniAi) 
is directing the anime and handling the series composition at studio feel. 
Kenji Fujisaki (Blood Lad, Ozma, B-Daman CrossFire) is designing the characters. 
Ryo Takahashi is composing the music.

Additional staff includes:
Prop design: Kuniaki Masuda
Chief animation director: Kenji Fujisaki
Art: Atelier PLATZ
Art director: Hiroki Matsumoto
Background Art: Yuka Hirama
Color design: Sari Tagawa
3DCG: Tsubasa Takagi
Director of photography: Rieko Koike
Editing: Daisuke Hiraki
Sound director: Jin Aketagawa

The anime will premiere on January 8 as part of Tokyo MX's "Ultra Super Anime Time" block, 
and also air on BS11 and AT-X.

Seven Seas Entertainment licensed the original manga and 
plans to release the series in North America beginning on November 22. 
Seven Seas describes the story:
Galko-chan always speaks her mind, which may not be the wisest decision in all cases, 
but it's never short of entertaining! 
Meet the exuberant and unbelievably busty high schooler, 
Galko, as she traverses the ups and downs of adolescence with spirit and verve, 
alongside her best friends--the anti-social loner, Otako, 
and the unpredictably honest, Ojyo.
Each of the girls' names refers to their type. 
Galko is a pun on gyaru or gal, which is a term used to describe a type of street fashion 
where women in their teens and 20s bleach their hair and 
wear highly decorated nails and a lot of makeup. 
Otako is a pun on otaku, and Ojo refers to a girl who is a daughter of a high-class family.

Suzuki launched the manga on Kadokawa's ComicWalker digital manga service in June 2014, 
but published it on Twitter before that. 
Kadokawa released the manga's 60th chapter on Friday. 
The publisher also released the manga's second compiled volume digitally and in print on June 23.
