23 arrested in post-game riots after Michigan State loses to Texas
Twenty-three people were arrested, and 10 fires started after Michigan State lost to Texas Tech 61-51 in the NCAA Tournament semifinals.
As many as 1,500 people surged into the streets, police told the Lansing State Journal, breaking bottles and damaging some property.
Charges included 22 misdemeanors and one felony, East Lansing police said in a statement.
The mayhem started “immediately following” the Michigan State University men’s NCAA Final Four basketball game on Saturday, police said, when a crowd gathered at an intersection in Lansing, where the school is headquartered.
About a half hour later, the crowd moved en masse into an intersection, blocking the roadway, police said. Not long after, “the crowd began to tear down street signs and throw glass bottles into the air, effectively making the gathering a civil disturbance,” police said. “The crowd is estimated to have consisted of 1,200 to 1,500 people at its peak.”
East Lansing Police and several other agencies dispersed the crowd “in its entirety without the use of chemical crowd management devices,” police said.
In addition, the East Lansing Fire Department and other agencies responded to 10 small fires in other areas of the city, the police department said.
[More U.S. News] Persistent pup survives 13 days in wilderness after being thrown in car wreck »
“These fires consisted of small pieces of furniture and there were no significantly sized crowds gathered around these fires,” the department noted.
Two street signs and one police van were damaged.
Texas Tech beat Michigan State 61-51 on Saturday night at the Final Four and will advance to play Virginia for the title, the NCAA said.
[More U.S. News] NRA shuts down NRATV: report »
Police in Lubbock, Texas were equally occupied, the Associated Press reported, when fans celebrating Texas Tech’s Final Four win flipped a car and set several scooters on fire. Several thousand fans gathered near campus after a win, and police cordoned them into a square block, the AP reported.
However, the crowd got more rowdy, and police had to disperse them with tear gas.
As in East Lansing, property damage was minimal, relegated in this case to the car, 10 scooters and a few city signs, AP said.
American Airlines extends Boeing 737 MAX grounding through Sept. 3
Prosecutors may seek death penalty against Playboy model accused of murdering alleged sugar-daddy psychiatrist
Cause of death for George Foreman's daughter Freeda revealed
Joe Biden’s son Hunter has remarried after recent breakup with brother’s widow
Tom Brady explains his ‘Tom Terrific’ trademark application: ‘I didn’t want people associating me with 
She burned herself.
An Oklahoma woman was arrested for setting fire to her neighbor’s abandoned home after she was caught by her own surveillance camera in the act.
Del City resident Annie Durham, 59, has been charged with second-degree arson in connection with the fire that was started on June 10.
“She caught herself on camera setting the fire,” Del City Fire Chief Brandon Pursell told KFOR.
Investigators set their sights on Durham after finding out about the feud that she had with her neighbor. They would notice the surveillance cameras that she had and received permission to look at the footage.
[More News] At least two dead after workplace shooting at California Ford dealership: reports »
Durham could be seen throwing something over her fence at the neighbor’s home.