
Are your tinned tomatoes picked by slave labour?
How the Italian mafia makes millions by exploiting migrants. By  Tobias Jones and  Ayo Awokoya


Thu 20 Jun 2019 06.00BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.43BST


On 6 August last year, 14 immigrant farmhands in Foggia, on the ankle of the Italian boot, were coming home from a 12-hour shift picking tomatoes in 40C heat. The minibus carrying them was registered in Bulgaria; the driver didnt have a licence or insurance. The seats inside were wooden planks, and it was so crowded that passengers couldnt even see out. The vehicle was travelling at speed when it collided head-on with a truck loaded with tomatoes.
After the crash, you could see contorted limbs through the smashed windows. The entire front third of the vehicle was concertinaed and the roof was ripped open. Bags and clothing spilled out on to the road, and there were large patches of blood on the asphalt. Twelve of the 14 labourers died. Only two days before, also in Foggia, four labourers had died in a similar accident: 16 dead in 48 hours.
In the Italian south, the lives of foreign agricultural labourers are so cheap that many NGOs have described their conditions as a modern form of slavery. They live in isolated rural ruins or shanty towns. Some have Italian residency permits, but many dont. A few have work contracts, although union organisers often find they are fake. Desperate for work, these labourers will accept any job in the fields even if the wages are far below, and the hours far above, union standards. The produce they pick regularly ends up on the shelves of Italian, and international, supermarkets, bought by consumers who have no idea of the suffering involved.
Although some of the workers are eastern Europeans, most of those picking crops in the Italian fields come from Africa, mainly  at the moment  from Gambia, Ghana, Nigeria, Sudan and Somalia. The number of arrivals has been growing exponentially in recent years: the number of boat people landing in Italy peaked at 181,436 in 2016.
The largest migrant reception centres are almost all in the south  in Sicily and Calabria  where mafia organisations exert greatest control and where agriculture requires a constant supply of labour. That supply is organised by gangmasters: agents who recruit seasonal workers and who are tasked with squeezing extra work out of them at the lowest possible cost.
There are a few factors on which modern slavery thrives, says Jakub Sobik, of the British NGO Anti-Slavery International: Vulnerability, discrimination and a lack of the rule of law. In Italian agriculture, all of these conditions are present.
There is no question that the migrant workers are vulnerable to exploitation, but Yvan Sagnet, a Cameroonian anti-slavery activist who once worked picking tomatoes in Puglia, explains that the vulnerability is mental as much as physical. When you have been enslaved, Sagnet says, its such a strong thing that your head begins to reason differently. Its not the slavery of hundreds of years ago, when you were deprived of your liberty. Slavery in the 21st century doesnt need chains, because they exploit a continual sense of intimidation that the most vulnerable people, like immigrants, feel.
Discrimination and violence against African workers gets worse in Italy with every passing day. In 2018, there were 126 racially motivated attacks recorded in the country, 