Conor McGregor’s appearance Thursday in Brooklyn Criminal Court, stemming from his April attack on a bus at Barclays Center, will  likely take only a couple of minutes. But that could be plenty of time to see where the former UFC champ’s criminal case is headed.

McGregor is slated to be in the courtroom for what could be nothing more than a hearing to schedule the next court appearance, giving prosecutors and McGregor’s legal team more time to work on a plea deal on numerous charges, including two felony counts of criminal mischief. 

Prosecutors and McGregor’s lawyers “are working on some kind of resolution” in the case, a person person with knowledge of the discussions told USA TODAY Sports. The source requested anonymity because of the sensitive nature of the talks. 

Cian Cowley, another MMA fighter, is also scheduled to be in court with his friend and fellow Irishman McGregor. Cowley faces similar charges as McGregor. Both were arraigned together after video footage showed the two and others throwing multiple objects at the bus after UFC 223 media day on April 5. 
Michael Chiesa (facial injuries) and Ray Borg (eye injury) were forced off the UFC 223 card after they sustained injures while sitting on the bus. 

A spokesperson for McGregor’s attorney, Bruce Maffeo, declined to comment when reached by USA TODAY Sports. A message left for Cowley’s lawyer, John Arlia, was not returned. 

Taylor Koss, a former Brooklyn prosecutor, told USA TODAY Sports that he expects the judge at the hearing – barring a plea agreement or the very unlikely event that all charges are dropped – to schedule another court appearance for this fall. 

While McGregor was arrested, prosecutors haven’t indicted him. (In New York, felony charges are usually presented to a grand jury, and there are multiple grand juries empaneled at any given time in Brooklyn.)  At their arraignment in April, McGregor and Cowley were each served with a 190.50 notice that declares grand jury proceedings could be forthcoming. 


There’s no indication, however, that either either case has been presented to a grand jury. Arlia said at the arraignment that Cowley would testify in front of the grand jury if his case were presented. 

“There appears to be no rush to indict Conor McGregor,” said Koss, who currently works as a defense attorney.

Koss said the lack of grand jury proceedings means that McGregor likely is headed toward a plea deal. 
“I don’t see jail time,” Koss said. “From my understanding, McGregor doesn’t have a criminal record. This is not a violent crime. Yes, it looked violent, but it’s a property crime. At a maximum, he’s probably looking at probation.”

That could prove problematic for both fighters, who travel internationally to fight and may face issues at border crossings. Each is currently free on bail. Koss said that the fighters’ defense attorneys would likely seek a conditional plea, which could be as short as six months, where each would be required to complete anger-management classes. 

For there to be a plea, prosecutors would have to agree to drop the felony charges in lieu of successfully completing probation and/or completing a conditional plea agreement successfully. 