House to hold second 'lessons from the Mueller report' hearing  live updatesPrevious round found exhaustive and remarkable parallels between Muellers report and Watergate scandal findings

Jamiles Lartey


Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.55BST



First published on Thu 20 Jun 2019 14.35BST




2.55pm BST
14:55


Patrick Wintour
Iran has shot down an US drone in the strait of Hormuz, accusing Washington of breaching Irans national sovereignty and trying to deepen tensions in the region.
Irans Revolutionary Guards said on Thursday that they had used a surface to air missile to shoot down what they called a US spy drone they claimed was flying in the countrys airspace.
US Central Command confirmed that one of its unmanned aircraft had been taken down, but said it was in international airspace. A CentCom spokesman, Capt Bill Urban said it was a US navy Global Hawk surveillance drone, which had been downed by an Iranian surface-to-air missile over the Strait of Hormuz at 11.35pm GMT.
Iranian reports that the aircraft was over Iran are false. This was an unprovoked attack on a U.S. surveillance asset in international airspace, Urban said.
Read more


2.38pm BST
14:38


In space news, The Navy briefed three senators Wednesday on a number of reported encounters with unidentified aircraft amid growing requests from members of oversight committees.
The Hill reports that Virginia Senator Mark Warners office confirmed the meeting. 
If pilots at Oceana or elsewhere are reporting flight hazards that interfere with training or put them at risk, then Senator Warner wants answers. It doesnt matter if its weather balloons, little green men, or something else entirely  we cant ask our pilots to put their lives at risk unnecessarily, his spokesperson, Rachel Cohen, said in a statement.
In other space news, Americans are at odds with the White House plans to send manned missions to the moon and or mars. According to a new poll the country much prefers a space program that focuses on potential asteroid impacts, scientific research and using robots to explore the cosmos. 
The poll by The Associated Press and the NORC Center for Public Affairs Research, released Thursday, one month before the 50th anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing, lists asteroid and comet monitoring as the No. 1 desired objective for the U.S. space program. About two-thirds of Americans call that very or extremely important, and about a combined 9 in 10 call it at least moderately important. 
By contrast, only about a quarter of Americans said moon or Mars exploration by astronauts should be among the space programs highest priorities. About another third called each of those moderately important. 


2.26pm BST
14:26


Billionaire Tom Steyer will air a new commercial on Fox & Friends Friday and Monday advocating for impeachment. 
According to Politico, Steyers group Need to Impeach is putting $700,000 behind the ad and selected the time slot so as to hopefully catch Trumps eye  the president is a frequent viewer of the program.
Right now, Donald Trump is committing crimes in the open, Steyer says in the ad, citing Trumps ongoing dismissal of congressional subpoenas, and his declaration that he would listen to opposition research supplied by a foreign power in the 2020 campaign. The Mueller report identified multiple instances of obstruction of justice, Steyer continues.


2.17pm BST
14:17


Good morning and welcome to the politics blog for Thursday, 20 June. 
The House Judiciary Committee is kicking off its second lessons from the Mueller report hearing shortly. The first round, which happened 