Brodie Van Wagenen denies allegations of providing in-game directives to Mickey Callaway
PHILADELPHIA – Mickey Callaway received an order from his boss when the manager notably pulled his ace from the mound earlier this month, a team source confirmed to the Daily News.
Mets general manager Brodie Van Wagenen had instructed the manager to remove Jacob deGrom from his start against the Diamondbacks on June 1 when the right-hander sustained a hip cramp. Van Wagenen was not in Arizona when he provided the directive.
Following the Mets’ loss to the Phillies on Monday, rumors had begun circulating about these directives, which prompted Van Wagenen to make himself available to the media to clear up any related questions. Van Wagenen was then asked whether this was a repeat offense.
"It's not true,” Van Wagenen said when he was directly asked if Callaway is hearing from the front office on certain decisions that have to be made in-game.
New York Mets general manager Brodie Van Wagenen answers questions during a press conference (Elsa/Getty)
"No in-game decisions are ever called down from the dugout,” Van Wagenen elaborated. “We're not allowed to communicate with Mickey or his coaching staff during the games and we're not doing that.”
Interestingly, none of the rumors included front-office executives “calling down from the dugout” specifically. Van Wagenen introduced that topic into the conversation for the first time Monday.
Van Wagenen was asked whether the circulating rumors were accurate — in regards to deGrom being forced to exit from his start as a direct result of the general manager’s command. Van Wagenen did not provide a straight answer.
"I’m not going to get into the specifics as far as one game or another, but I can tell you that we do communicate with the training staff in the training room when there’s a player that suffers an injury,” Van Wagenen said. “Anything that is health-related to a player’s status, we do communicate with that. But as far as performance-driven decisions in-game, that’s Mickey’s call and the coaching staff’s call.”
Van Wagenen maintained that he is abiding by Major League Baseball’s rules of communicating with the Mets training staff when a player gets injured. The general manager cited X-rays and transferring information to the press box as examples of evaluating a player’s health. Van Wagenen referred to such instances as normal protocol.
"We can talk to the training staff to access the health of the player and make sure the player's safety is the primary concern,” Van Wagenen said.
Callaway said he has full latitude to call the shots and manage a team. The skipper said when a player gets injured on the field or during the game, “everyone” is in communication with the training staff to take care of their players the best they can.
"I think we got information from all parties and we made the decision to take care of our ace pitcher that’s going to be here for a long time. We all thought it was prudent at that point,” Callaway said about the specific incident with deGrom on June 1.

