Inside bonkers British firm that will scatter your ashes in SPACE for £3,000 – and even film your final journey in HD
YOU'LL probably never make it to space in your lifetime – but what about after death?
One kooky British firm offers you the chance to literally reach the heavens by scattering your ashes 20 miles above the surface of the Earth.
Run by a pair of self-proclaimed "garden shed scientists", Sheffield firm Ascension Flights charges up to £3,000 to strap your remains onto a modified weather balloon.
It floats high above the clouds before the payload is released in space.
Your ashes then circle the planet before ultimately returning as raindrops or snowflakes, according to co-founder and director Dr Chris Rose.
He says the space sendoffs are about giving families a unique way to say their final farewell.
"It's a fitting tribute to those of us who have lived in the space age," Chris told The Sun.
"Essentially, we're all made of stardust. Returning to the stars is a completion of the loop."
Chris, 33, set up Ascension Flights with fellow space fanatic Dr Alex Baker after they met at Sheffield University.
It's part of an odd new trend in funerary services that has punters going extraterrestrial with their loved ones' remains.
In 2018, US company Elysium Flights launched a gram each of 100 people's ashes beyond orbit on a SpaceX rocket. After the capsule was ejected, families and friends could track the remains until they eventually burned up in the atmosphere.
But why would someone want to fire their nearest and dearest to the final frontier?
"When it comes to figuring out what to do with someone's ashes, people are often in a bit of a quandary," Chris explains.
"Maybe the deceased didn't leave a request on where to spread them, or the location they had in mind is no longer available.
"Space burials aren't location specific, so we can essentially launch and scatter your loved ones onto the Earth. We've solved a lot of stress for people looking for that perfect spot."
Chris and Alex cooked up the idea for Ascension Flights a few years ago and took it all the way to Dragon's Den in 2017 – though they turned down a lucrative offer from Deborah Meadon.
Launches began in 2018, and 50 people have been sent up so far, with another 25 flights lined up this year.
Cosmic scatterings start at £895 for the basic package, stretching to £3,000 for more elaborate launches and locations.