Mass Effect: Andromeda is an upcoming action role-playing (RPG) third-person shooter video game being developed by BioWare and published by Electronic Arts. It is being developed using the Frostbite game engine. Mass Effect: Andromeda was officially announced on 15 June 2015 during the Electronic Arts press conference at E3 and is scheduled to be released 21 March 2017 on Xbox One, PlayStation 4, and PC.
Story
Mass Effect: Andromeda shares the same as the original trilogy, but is considered a separate story, taking place long after Mass Effect 3. Players will be leaving the Milky Way behind and exploring the Andromeda galaxy instead. There, players will lead the fight for a new home in hostile territory - where they are the aliens.
Payers will play as the Pathfinder - a leader of a squad of military-trained explorers - with deep progression and customization systems. This is the story of humanity's next chapter, and choices throughout the game will ultimately determine their survival in the Andromeda Galaxy.
Features
Be the Pathfinder. Chart your own course in a dangerous new galaxy. Unravel the mysteries of the Andromeda galaxy as you discover rich, alien worlds in the search for humanity's new home.
Return to the Mass Effect universe you love. Lead the first humans in Andromeda on a desperate search for our new home. In this new chapter of Mass Effect, meet and recruit all-new, interesting characters caught up in an epic space saga filled with mystery and galactic conflict.
Battle like never before. New additions like destructible environments, boosted jumps for added verticality, and all-new weapons and Biotics make combat more thrilling than ever.
Play your way. Build a formidable hero with amazing weapons, powers and tech. With a much more flexible skill and weapon progression tree, you can replicate your play style to make you unstoppable against powerful alien enemies.
Join the APEX Forces. Multiplayer in Mass Effect: Andromeda places you into a class-based, 4-player co-op fire-team experience. Team up with three of your friends to take on the enemy threat and protect the interests of the Andromeda Initiative.