NFL players far more likely to die from heart and brain issues than MLB players
There’s more evidence to suggest that NFL players deal with the potentially fatal effects of football on their bodies long after their last career tackle.

A new study from researchers out of Harvard’s T.H. Chan School of Public Health adds fuel to the science that playing football can have long-term-health impacts long after players leave the game. Compared to professional baseball players, those who played football were 26 percent more likely to die of cardiovascular and neurodegenerative causes.

Concussions are an issue the NFL is unable to shake, between player suicide, ongoing negotiations in the class action settlement and head trauma possibly being used as a legal defense in the bizarre rape trial of former Jet Kellen Winslow II. Unfortunately, there might be precedent; in one of the most horrific NFL stories of the last decade, former Patriot Aaron Hernandez was convicted of murder and killed himself in jail. His brain was later found to have significant evidence of CTE.

The connections between a sport, an injury and an outcome have not been easy to tie neatly together, if they indeed exist. This study illuminates at least one important aspect, and it’s that football players die of heart and cognitive causes at a higher rate than baseball players.

The Harvard study examined 3,419 NFL and 2,708 MLB players with at least five playing years who died between 1979 and 2013. Many of these men would have been playing in the 1960s through the 1980s. Pads and helmets were different in that era, as was the size and speed of their opponent.
Some of the biggest differences between baseball and football is the impact on a player’s brain, and the weight that football players need at certain positions such as on the offensive line. Both of those conditions could account in part for the difference, but so could smoking, or race and genetics, or any other number of factors. More studies will need to be undertaken to hone in on those factors, but this one goes a long way toward showing that there is a significant difference in health outcomes in professional athletes depending on their sport.

“For studies with professional athletes, it is difficult to find an appropriate control group,” said Carrie Esopenko, Assistant Professor in the School of Health Professions at Rutgers Biomedical Health Sciences. “It’s good that the authors compared mortality rates in two professional samples.”

Esopenko, whose work includes examining the long-term effects of repetitive head trauma in retired professional athletes, said a next step may be to compare NFL players to another professional sport where there is a higher risk of concussion, such as soccer, hockey or rugby. In the new study, Esopenko clarifies that this study is still looking at a population where repetitive hits to the head are a significant part of the game compared to a population with arguably less exposure to head hits.