
Smart speakers: five ways to get one on the cheap
Want to dip your toe in the voice-controlled world of Amazons Alexa and Googles Assistant? Here are best, cheapest ways to start

Samuel Gibbs


Sat 13 Apr 2019 09.15BST


Sales of smart speakers are soaring despite some peoples concerns over privacy, with Amazons Alexa leading the charge into homes in various Echo devices and Googles Home and Assistant snapping at its heels.
They come in various shapes, sizes and prices, but if you just want to dip your toe into the burgeoning voice-powered world, whats the cheapest way to get Alexa or Google Assistant into your home?
RRP: from free
Voice assistants dont actually need a dedicated speaker to work. If you have a modern smartphone chances are you either already have Google Assistant, if you have an Android phone, or can install the app on an iPhone. The same goes for Amazons Alexa, which can even be set as the default voice assistant on an Android phone. You could also try Siri on an iPhone, but it isnt as capable.
On an Android phone you can set the wakeword OK, Google to open Google Assistant even when the phone is off, so you can do hands-free commands and get an idea of what a taste of a smart speaker would be like. With the Alexa app open you can so similar. On an iPhone youll need the app open to access either Google Assistant or Alexa.
Some phones such as Googles Pixel 3, even have stands and accessories that turn them into smart displays with hands-free voice commands.
Audio quality and volume will likely be lamentable if not using headphones. You can always try a Bluetooth speaker hooked up to your phone but given the price of the standalone smart speakers  from 25  its unlikely to be worth it.
Verdict
The simple way to sample voice assistants and save money if you discover that youre not really interested in asking about the latest score in the Champions League.
RRP: 49 - deals as low as 29
If Google Assistant is the one you want, the cheapest of Googles Home voice-controlled speakers should be at the top of your list. The Google Home Mini is a small circular, fabric-covered puck with a speaker that points straight up out the top.
It is available in light grey, dark grey, pink and a pale blue, with a touch-sensitive top for controlling volume. A row of LED lights shine through the fabric to show when its listening to you, while the speaker is loud and clear enough to easily project Google Assistant across a room.
The Home Mini is really good at hearing you too, and Google Assistants understanding of natural language is unparalleled. Even if you mess up your question, nine times out of 10 itll still understand what you meant.
Audio quality is reasonable for a small speaker, and you can Chromecast to it or use it as a Bluetooth speaker, if talking to it gets old. Theres a mic mute switch on the bottom to stop it listening to you.
Verdict
Small, cheap and effective, the Home Mini is the one to get if youre on-board with Google
RRP: 50 - deals as low as 25
The cheapest complete Alexa speaker is the Echo Dot, and its popularity is well deserved. Now in its third generation, the small puck now comes in white, black or grey with a plastic 