Wizards subtly join Anthony Davis trade, acquire three players from the Lakers

The Washington Wizards aren’t planning to be a major player on the first day of NBA free agency. But this offseason could be remembered as the summer the balance of power shifted in the league, and the Wizards will have played a small yet important role in the biggest story ahead of free agency.

On Thursday, Washington acquired three players (Moritz Wagner, Jemerrio Jones and Isaac Bonga) in a trade with the Los Angeles Lakers, according to a person with knowledge of the deal. By doing so, the Wizards lodged themselves into the Anthony Davis saga as the third team in the monumental trade between the New Orleans Pelicans and Lakers.

The Pelicans agreed this month to trade Davis, a six-time all-star, to the Lakers, but the timing of the deal’s completion would impact Los Angeles’s salary cap. With the Wizards entering the fray to send $1.1 million to the Pelicans in return for three young players from the Lakers, coupled with Davis waiving his $4 million salary kicker, Los Angeles can complete the deal July 6 and have enough money to sign a maximum contract free agent.
While the rest of the league awaits Sunday’s kickoff to free agency — all eyes are on the Lakers, who now can go after NBA Finals MVP Kawhi Leonard or all-star point guards Kemba Walker or Kyrie Irving — Washington continues to subtly rebuild its roster through creative moves by surrendering no assets on the roster and spending efficiently.

Wagner, a 6-foot-11 big man and first-round pick a year ago (No. 25 overall), will earn $2 million next season and highlights the incoming crop. In his rookie season in Los Angeles, Wagner made 43 appearances with the Lakers but also appeared in six games for the G League’s South Bay Lakers. When Wagner was able to display the range of his game in the G League, he averaged 16.5 points and 5.8 rebounds and flashed the ability to stretch the floor by attempting 6.2 three-pointers per game.
As Wagner went through the pre-draft process last spring, he participated in a workout with the Wizards. At the time, Wagner was viewed as an intriguing stretch-five solution for Washington, which expressed a goal to shoot more threes. Though the Wizards, who possessed the 15th and 44th picks in the draft, could not claim him, they now add Wagner to their burgeoning collection of big men.

Wagner joins a roster that includes the guaranteed contracts of Dwight Howard and Ian Mahinmi. On Wednesday, the Wizards extended a qualifying offer to Thomas Bryant, who started 53 games at center. The move will make Bryant a restricted free agent, and Washington will have the right to match any offer sheet he signs with another team.

Besides Wagner, the Wizards obtained a pair of players in Jones and Bonga who spent the majority of the 2018-19 season in the G League.
Jones, a 6-foot-5 undrafted forward out of New Mexico State, appeared in 47 games with the South Bay Lakers (9.4 points, 9.6 rebounds, 3.5 assists) but signed for the final six games of the regular season with Los Angeles. Although Jones shot only 20 percent from long range in his limited time with the Lakers, he has fashioned himself as a dogged defender.

“I just love basketball, so if you see me, you’ll like the game I play, too, because it ain’t all about a bucket,” Jones said in an interview published on the Lakers’ website. “It’s about the little things. The dirty work. The nitty-gritty.”

Bonga, a 19-year-old forward from Germany, was selected 39th in the 2018 draft and has the frame of a skinny forward (6-9, 180 pounds) but the skills of a point guard. Though Bonga looked raw at times during his 31 games in the G League, averaging 2.8 turnovers compared with 2.7 assists per game, he has been scouted as an athletic playmaker in need of refinement. The Lakers traded a future second-round pick to acquire Bonga from the Philadelphia 76ers, who drafted him. Assistant general manager Jesse Buss said at the time that the team saw Bonga as possessing a “good long-term upside.”
