Brooklyn woman says she vomited blood after drinking minibar ‘soda’ at Dominican resort where woman died last month
A Brooklyn woman says she barely escaped with her life from a deadly Dominican Republic resort after a bleach-filled soda bottle turned her romantic getaway into a horror show.
Awilda Montes, 43, told the Daily News Friday that she initially believed a simple mistake was behind the bizarre incident that left chemical burns in her mouth after she started vomiting blood Oct. 25 inside her room at the Luxury Bahia Principe Bouganville.
"I thought the maid service, maybe to not carry the bleach bottle from room to room, would maybe put it into a smaller bottle. Or maybe they were trying to take it home to clean their house," she said.
But when news broke of a trio of American deaths on the island, she began to suspect something more malicious.
"I honestly never imagined that somebody was trying to purposely do that until now, until watching the three deaths," she told The News. "Now I'm thinking had (the hotel) investigated this mystery, they would be alive."
[More U.S. News] Persistent pup survives 13 days in wilderness after being thrown in car wreck »
She was a guest at the same resort complex where three U.S. tourists died in the Dominican last month. One woman, who was staying in the same hotel as Montes, collapsed after getting a drink at the minibar in her room, according to a spokesman for the dead woman's family. And a Maryland couple was found dead inside their room at the sister resort adjacent to where Montes drank her tainted soda.
Montes and her then-boyfriend had a few drinks at the bar when they arrived, she said, before heading up to their room. A thirsty Montes grabbed a soda bottle from the minibar and took a big sip.
"I noticed there was no fizz in it but I just figured it was Dominican soda, it was kind of flat. So I took a swig .... and luckily I kind of held it in my mouth a bit and I felt it burn. I swallowed a bit ... (then) ran into the bathroom and spit in the sink," the Park Slope resident told The News.
[More U.S. News] NRA shuts down NRATV: report »
Noticing blood in the sink, she turned to her boyfriend, she said.
"I told him, 'I think this is bleach. And he smelled the bottle and he said, 'It is,'" she told The News. After she called the front desk, someone was sent upstairs to bring her to the lobby, where a trolley took her to a medical clinic, Montes recounted. Along the way, someone took the soda bottle from her, she added.
According to Montes, hotel management offered her a free couples massage and dinner on the house in return for her signature on a non-disclosure agreement — a deal that she rejected after the incident that left her in agony.
[More U.S. News] Drake breezes by Beatles for second-most top-10 hits in Billboard Hot 100 »
"I was miserable," she said. "I was vomiting. I had stomach pains. The chemical burns were all over. I still don't have sensation in my tongue."
Montes didn't make the connection between the recent fatalities and her own health scare until a friend called from Los Angeles and mentioned the three deaths last month.
"It just breaks my heart that people actually died," she told The News.
[More U.S. News] Man who killed beloved Busch Gardens flamingo run over by truck »
Montes produced three pages of medical records from the local clinic that treated her after she took a swallow of what she thought was a 7Up.
The report detailed "a pain in the dorsal and lateral region of the tongue, accompanied with vomiting … with a frequency of two occasions following the (ingestion) of a liquid approximately thirty minutes ago."
She was at the hotel with her now ex-boyfriend to mark their first anniversary, and says the scary experience doomed their romance.
[More U.S. News] San Francisco officially passes ban on e-cigarette sales »
"The next day I was nauseous," she recounted. "I was in pain, and all I could have was ice."
The Dominican death toll for visiting Americans became a recent cause for concern after the Americans tourists passed away last month while vacationing on the Caribbean island.
Miranda Schaupp-Werner, 41, died inside her room shortly after arriving at the Luxury Bahia Principe Bouganville resort on May 25. The Allentown, Pa., woman traveled to the Dominican Republic with her husband to celebrate their ninth anniversary, and reportedly collapsed after taking a drink from the minibar.
Five days later, a Maryland couple was found dead inside their room at the nearby Grand Bahia Principe, the Bouganville's sister resort. Edward Holmes, 63, and Cynthia Day, 49, passed away shortly before they were due to check out of the hotel.
"We reiterate our firm commitment to collaborating completely with the authorities and hope for a prompt resolution of their inquiries and actions, and will not be making any further statements that may interfere with them," said a Friday statement from Bahia Principe Hotels & Resorts.
The company added that legal action was a possibility over "the dissemination of false information" regarding the deaths on their properties.
[More U.S. News] WARNING: Devastating photo of drowned migrant father and young daughter at border shows perils desperate families face »
"Serious insults and threats have been levied against some of our more than 15,000 employees and their families, who are the backbone of our company and before whom we cannot stand idle on the sideline," the statement said.
Emails and messages to resorts on Friday were not immediately returned.
Earlier this week, a couple from Colorado came forward to say they believe they were poisoned by pesticides at the Grand Bahia Principe in June 2018, while taking what they thought would be a dream vacation.
[More U.S. News] Radio veteran Kae Thompson, former host of eponymous WLIB talk show, dies at 83 »
In a lawsuit filed against the resort earlier this year, Kaylynn Knull and Tom Schwand said they were suffered symptoms of excessive drooling, watering eyes and dizziness, among other things, after a strong chemical smell pervaded their room at the resort.
"That night, we both woke up soaked in sweat at like four in the morning and kind of terrified," Knull told Denver7, the local ABC channel. "And we booked a flight home before the sun came up."
An American doctor said they were likely exposed to "organophosphate poisoning," the pesticides Knull believes were sprayed on the resort's plants.
[More U.S. News] Ejected softball player arrested after allegedly assaulting umpire »
The couple asked for $1 million in their lawsuit, which has stalled in the Dominican courts.
The Caribbean island was in the headlines again in April when police confirmed that a missing American couple — Orlando Moore and his girlfriend Portia Ravenelle —died in a late-night car crash while heading to the airport for their flight back to New York. The New Rochelle couple had been missing for more than a week when Dominican police identified their bodies.
With John Annese