What the school discipline fix gets right, and what it gets wrong
I like Schools Chancellor Richard Carranza. I like that he’s firing people at Tweed. In fact, I wish he’d fire them all. I’ve seen people from Tweed announce the most inane initiatives at meetings, and I ask them why. They say, “Well, something had to be done, so we’re doing this.” I always think if you’re going to do something, you might as well make it something worthwhile. I’m concerned when people like that are in charge of our discipline system.
I was once teaching a class when a strange kid walked in. I told him to get out. He offered to blow my head off with a .45. I made it my business to find out who the kid was. When I finally identified him, a dean told me they had called his parents. He said the kid was brain-damaged, and there was nothing more he could do. I told him I didn’t think that kid belonged in the same building with my students. I still don’t. Last I looked, it’s a crime to threaten to kill people. If that kid talks that way to me, who knows how he talks to other students?
Nonetheless, I understand the push for restorative justice, and I support it absolutely. If we can find a way to place kids on a better path without suspending them, there’s no question that’s what we should do. Suspension, of course, entails removing students from classes. A whole lot of students find that cause for celebration, and it’s not difficult to understand why. Every teacher I know, no matter how much she may love her job, has a skip in her step on Friday afternoons.
I don’t want to see students arrested for crimes like graffiti. Restorative justice could work (though I’d respect it more if the students also cleaned the graffiti). I don’t want kids going to jail for marijuana either, but I certainly don’t want them using it in school. I’ve had students who were chronic marijuana users. They didn’t really cause major problems, but it was a challenge. I could’ve been a more productive teacher if I didn’t have to spend so much time waking them up, only to have them fall asleep again.
For disorderly conduct, if it means making a scene or something, I’d agree that it ought not to result in a criminal record. Maybe our education system would be better if more kids made a scene. Sometimes when I prep kids for the English Regents, I wonder why they don’t just rise up and toss me out the door, or at least force me to do something interesting. I’d have nothing but respect for students who spoke out or organized against outrages like caging children. 
Nonetheless, if you do things that can potentially hurt people, that’s another thing entirely.
If you throw a chair at my student, or my kid, I won’t be content with your apology. I don’t want to hear that the kid who did that is in some restorative justice session talking out his issues. I want that kid somewhere he won’t be able to hurt anyone again. I’m also not entirely sure that the new 20-day limit on suspensions, with precious few exceptions, works for me.
A lot of people say and write that students who are suspended more than 20 days tend not to do as well, and might not graduate on time or at all. I’m certain they’re correct. I question, though, whether the suspensions are the cause. I’d argue that if your interests lie in throwing chairs, whether or not we suspend you, or for how long, is of little consequence. Sadly, if you’re 16 years old and sleeping in class every day, whether or not we suspend you isn’t the issue either. 
But I absolutely want the chair-thrower far away from my kids. I don’t care if his chances for graduation are diminished. I further do not trust Tweed to differentiate between what is dangerous and merely inconvenient. They’re perhaps the most incompetent group of bureaucrats I’ve ever encountered, and it’s they who need to be suspended 365 days a year, at a minimum, if we really want to help the children of New York City.