Next Queens DA is very likely to be one of these 6 candidates
This fall Queens will get a new district attorney for the first time in nearly three decades — and chances are good it’ll be whoever wins Tuesday’s Democratic primary.
Borough voters have seven candidates to choose from, including one who will still be on the ballot despite dropping out at the last minute and endorsing a rival.
The winner is likely to easily defeat the Republican candidate and become Queens’ chief prosecutor after longtime DA Richard Brown stepped down this year. Brown, who was appointed by Gov. Cuomo in 1991, died last month.
Tiffany Caban
Seen as the insurgent candidate, public defender Tiffany Caban is the furthest to the left. She’s been endorsed by the city Democratic Socialists of America, the Working Families Party and Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-Queens, Bronx), as well as presidential candidates Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren. Caban has called for the decriminalization of sex work and vowed to “end racist law enforcement.” She supports shorter sentences for felonies and an end to civil asset forfeiture. She was found not qualified by the Queens County Bar Association.
Melinda Katz
With the support of the Queens County Democratic machine — and the biggest fundraiser by far — Borough President Melinda Katz is viewed as the one to beat. She’s been endorsed by 16 unions — including the powerful 1199 SEIU, 32BJ and the United Federation of Teachers — and 29 elected officials, including Councilman Rory Lancman, who suspended his own campaign on Friday to back Katz. Though not as radical as Caban, Katz has backed progressive proposals including ending cash bail and the prosecution of low-level marijuana arrests. She’s previously served in the state Assembly and City Council.
Gregory Lasak
Retired state Supreme Court Justice Gregory Lasak was dubbed “Mr. Murder” for his work as a prosecutor in the Queens DA’s office. He stepped down from the bench last fall to run for DA. Lasak has positioned himself as the tough-on-crime candidate. He got the highest rating of all candidates from the Queens Bar Association and has been backed by law enforcement unions including the Detectives Endowment Association and the Sergeants Benevolent Association. He said he wouldn’t request bail for misdemeanor or nonviolent offenses and, like all of his opponents, he pledged to create a conviction review unit.
Betty Lugo
A former Nassau County ADA and Republican, current Democrat Betty Lugo claims to have co-founded the first Hispanic-owned law firm in the New York in 1992. She leads the firm’s litigation practice in general and commercial liability, construction, labor law and real estate. Lugo has the most moderate — or conservative, depending on who you ask — positions in the race. She supports keeping Rikers Island open to inmates but redesigning the jails and working to cut down the population.
Mina Malik
A former prosecutor in both the Queens and Brooklyn district attorney’s offices, Mina Malik was also executive director of the Civilian Complaint Review Board. Malik was a deputy attorney general for the District of Columbia and helped design the conviction review unit set up by the late Brooklyn DA Ken Thompson. All candidates have called for Queens to create a similar unit. Malik also supports ending cash bail and low-level drug prosecutions, as well as diversifying the DA’s office.
Jose Nieves
An Army combat veteran, Jose Nieves most recently served as a deputy chief in the special investigations and prosecutions unit at the state attorney general’s office. He’s worked as a prosecutor for the Brooklyn DA’s office, and the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of New York. If elected, he said he would abolish the Queens DA’s office policy of forcing people charged with a crime to waive their due process rights before seeing evidence in their cases if they want to engage in plea bargaining.