Melania Trump Says Children in Detention Center Are There 'As a Direct Result of Adult Actions'
By ABIGAIL ABRAMS June 22, 2018
First Lady Melania Trump said that her visit to the U.S.-Mexico border on Thursday reminded her that the detained children she visited were there “as a direct result of adult actions.”

It was not immediately clear whether the First Lady was referring to the children’s parents or U.S. government officials when she said their situation was caused by “adult actions,” but her comments echoed those of President Donald Trump, who has falsely blamed Democratic members of Congress for his administration’s policy separating parents and children apprehended at the border.

During her unannounced visit to the border, the First Lady had planned to stop at two facilities in McAllen Texas: a border patrol center that processes migrant families and a detention center for children who have arrived from Central America.
Severe weather prevented her from visiting the families at the border patrol center, but she toured the Upbringing New Hope children’s center and participated in a roundtable discussion where she asked questions about how children were cared for in the facility.

“I was very impressed with the center and the hardworking staff and leadership there – and thank them for all of their hard work. The children were eager to learn and were kind and in good spirits,” the First Lady said in a statement after she returned to Washington, D.C. on Thursday. “Spending time with them reinforces the fact that these kids are in this situation as a direct result of adult actions. It is my hope that Members of Congress will finally reach across the aisle and work together to solve this problem with common sense immigration reform that secures our borders and keeps families together.”

The First Lady’s visit came one day after her husband signed an Executive Order to keep immigrant families together while they are detained following intense pressure over his administration’s “zero tolerance” policy.

The First Lady sparked controversy by wearing a jacket on her way to Texas that said “I really don’t care. Do U?”
'He Had Everything.' Anthony Bourdain's Mother Says She Never Thought He Would Die by Suicide
By JENNIFER CALFAS June 9, 2018
Anthony Bourdain’s mother has expressed shock and sadness over the death of her son in an interview with the New York Times.

“He is absolutely the last person in the world I would have ever dreamed would do something like this,” Gladys Bourdain, who was an editor at the Times for years, told the newspaper.

Bourdain, the renowned chef and author whose storytelling and traveling influenced others and embraced different cultures, died this week in an apparent suicide. He was 61 years old.

“He had everything,” his mother told the Times. “Success beyond his wildest dreams. Money beyond his wildest dreams.”

Gladys Bourdain told the Times that Eric Ripert, a French chef and close friend of her son’s, told her that Bourdain “had been in a dark mood these past couple of days.”

Bourdain’s death shocked and saddened the world this week as fans and friends of his expressed the impact he had on their lives and the influential role he had in the restaurant industry. Restaurant owners and chefs who he visited in his variety of TV shows point to him as a reason for their growing success, and fans took to social media to express how he used his platform to convey empathy and understanding.

Bourdain’s suicide followed that of Kate Spade, an influential fashion designer who had died in an apparent suicide at age 55, and came at a time when the rates of suicide were on the rise across the U.S. Mental health professionals advised people to reach out and support friends or loved ones who may be struggling, and learn to identify warning signs like depression or changes in behavior, among other behaviors.

The deaths of two influential figures in their respective fields have also provoked conversations about how successful people are not immune depression, mental health issues or suicide. TIME’s Belinda Luscombe detailed this in a piece, where she examined the deaths of Bourdain and Kate Spade, the influential fashion designer who had died by an apparent suicide days earlier. “Many lives are not as they appear. Happiness is not the end result of a sum of accomplishments,” Luscombe writes. “The person whose wealth/wardrobe/job/talent you wish you had has his or her own struggles, and they could at least equal our own.”

If you or someone you know may be contemplating suicide, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255.
