
Five of the best noise-cancelling headphones
Blocking out annoying sounds on flights or the commute with these options priced from 80

Samuel Gibbs


Sat 16 Mar 2019 07.00GMT


Last modified on Sat 16 Mar 2019 09.57GMT


Daily life is stressful enough without being subjected to the noise of others. Thankfully noise cancelling headphones can help by actively blocking oppressive distractions, whether its for flights, the commute, or just in the office, with effective options costing from 80.
Heres a quick guide to separate the wheat from the chaff. 
RRP: 330 - deals from 289Bose pioneered the first noise-cancelling headsets in 1986 and has been a market-leader ever since for good reason: super-effective active noise cancellation (ANC).
Now in their second iteration, the QC35 II are the best noise-cancelling headphones you can buy, combining excellent ANC and passive isolation with good sound, simple operation and reliable connectivity.
The Bluetooth headphones can also be used with a cable if you want to plug into a planes entertainment system, they support AAC for higher-quality lag-free audio, can connect to two devices at once and have easy to use buttons for pause, play, track skip and volume. Theres a button for activating Alexa or Google Assistant or to adjust the level of noise cancelling for your environment.
Arguably it is the QC35 IIs unparalleled comfort that sets them apart. Small, fairly discreet and light, with clear ear spaces in the cups and the best fit available. They fold up relatively compactly for travel too, and are durable enough to survive life on the road just thrown in a bag.
Battery life is about 20 hours via Bluetooth, or longer via cable. Charging takes only about two hours. They have a clear and powerful sound characteristic of Bose thats good for most music genres, but theres no customisation and audiophiles might dislike the active Bose EQ.
VerdictFor those that can afford the hefty price tag, these are the most effective headphones, highly comfortable and built for the road.
RRP: 329 - deals from 282The long-term Bose rival from Sony is now in its third iteration and better than ever. The MX1000M3 finally has Bose-matching noise cancellation, which can be fine tuned manually or automatically depending on ambient noise.
Where the QC35 II go for simplicity, Sony goes for options. These Bluetooth headphones support a smorgasbord of audio standards including AAC, aptX, aptX HD and high-resolution LDAC, which means youll get top audio quality, lag-free out of almost any Bluetooth device. Its no coincidence then that these are some of the very best sounding Bluetooth headphones you can buy, and have plenty of customisation should you dislike the out-of-box sound.
Multi-device connectivity is tricky and not worth bothering with, while the noise-cancelling control button can be made to trigger Google Assistant or Alexa. Playback control is via touch on the right ear cup: double tap to pause or play, swipe left or right to skip track or up and down to adjust volume. They work well, but not with gloves on.
The MX1000M3 battery lasts around 30 hours between charges with everything going, the headphones can be used via cable and charged by USB-C, which is great.
Theyre light, fold up fairly compact, but are slightly bigger and less comfortable than the Bose QC35 II. They also dont feel as robust, but have a similar subtle styling.
VerdictBuy these for the sound quality, but Bose for all-day comfort.
RRP: 230 - deals from 120Both 