
How witnessing a police shooting put a Guatemalan journalist in danger
Carlos Choc had to go on the run after seeing the violent repression of a protest at the Fenix mine

Juliette Garside


Wed 19 Jun 2019 17.00BST


Last modified on Wed 19 Jun 2019 19.00BST


It was when police arrested his colleague in October 2017 that Carlos Choc realised it was becoming too dangerous for him to keep reporting.
From the town of El Estor, and a member of the Maya Qeqchi community, Choc, 36, has made his living documenting the lives of indigenous citizens.
On 27 May 2017, he became a witness to the violent repression of a demonstration in his home town. Fishermen had put up a barricade, concerned about pollution in the countrys largest expanse of fresh water, Lake Izabal.
They believed a nickel refinery at the Fenix mine, on the shores of the lake, was to blame. Fenix belongs to the Swiss-headquartered Solway group, which insists it is not contaminating the water. The government said the pollution came from agriculture and sewage.
Riot police first fired teargas, and then used live ammunition. One fisherman was shot dead, another wounded by a bullet from behind. The local station chief, confronted by journalists, still denies ordering his men to fire. There is an investigation, but two years on no officers have been charged.
I was right in the middle, the riot police on one side, the people on the other, Choc said. The shots passed very close, even whistled past. I had to throw myself to the ground. But I tried to document, I tried to take photos, to take videos.
Choc was able to record a killing that ministers at first tried to deny had happened at all. One photo, below, appears to show officers holding guns. Police fled the scene, leaving the body of Carlos Maaz Coc on the tarmac. The mayors house was then set on fire, and the public prosecutor refused the pleas of Maazs widow to attend the scene, saying the environment in El Estor was too dangerous. It was left to the family to take his remains away, after four-and-a-half hours of inaction.
That afternoon, Choc began to receive calls from TV stations, asking him to confirm the killing. He went on air to report from the scene. Later that night the threats began.
There were anonymous phone calls from people using foul language, asking him to come and meet them, then threatening to visit his home. Choc, a single father, was worried for his young children.
Within weeks, arrest warrants had been issued against Choc and another indigenous journalist, Jerson Xitumul. Both men were also working on an investigation into the Fenix mine for the news website Prensa Comunitaria.
In June, the public prosecutor added their names to a list of fishermen accused of holding company staff against their will during the blockade. The journalists say they were not present during these detentions, and have no knowledge of them. In May 2018, the companys lawyer included their names in a request to link this case with a separate claim of attempted femicide.
Seventy-five women and their children, who were trapped for two weeks inside the gated community where the mine workers live with their families, have filed a criminal complaint against the fishermen and the two journalists. 
The companys request does not acknowledge their status as reporters. The presiding judge, and the prosecutors, repeatedly refer to 