E3 2018: Dragon Ball FighterZ Looks Impressive On Switch
Z Fighters on the go with Nintendo's handheld.
Published by Alessandro Fillari on June 12, 2018 at 11:00AM
After weeks of rumors and leaks prior to E3 2018, one of the Nintendo Switch's most-requested ports has been announced. During Nintendo's pre-E3 livestream, the publisher revealed that Dragon Ball FighterZ will be making its way to the mobile console later this year.
Just before E3 2018, we had the opportunity to go hands-on with the game and put it through its paces. While there were some noticeable tweaks for this release on Switch, Arc System Works' Dragon Ball fighting game is a strong port that maintains the game's fast and dynamic action. Playing both docked and undocked versions, we saw that the gameplay kept its pace consistently for the most part, with only a few minor dips. Most impressive of all, Dragon Ball FighterZ's strong visual style, which emulates the anime and manga's look, is just as strong with this release.
While the current versions on PS4, Xbox One, and PC are already in their post-release period, having seen several new DLC characters added over the last few months, Dragon Ball FighterZ on Switch will release with only the base roster. All DLC characters so far, such as Vegito, Bardock, Broly, and Zematsu, will come sometime after the Switch port's release.
GameSpot reviews editor Peter Brown reviewed Dragon Ball FighterZ this past January and gave it a strong review, claiming that the game is one of the standouts of the genre. 
"FighterZ is complex and distinct enough to be enjoyed by fighting game competitors, but there's no question that it's been designed to tap into the hearts of Dragon Ball's most dedicated fans, and no doubt those same qualities will win people over who've never given the series a chance. Where past games attempted to get there through huge character rosters and deliberately predictable trips down memory lane, FighterZ has bottled the essence of what makes the series' characters, animation, and sense of humor so beloved and reconfigured it into something new: a Dragon Ball fighting game that can go toe-to-toe with the best of the genre."