
Britain is in the grip of an existential crisis that reaches far beyond Brexit
Contact author


Wed 29 May 2019 06.00BST


Last modified on Wed 29 May 2019 11.53BST


The person who is best qualified to hold up a mirror to British politics today is neither a minister nor an academic. He is not even British. No: he is, of course, Michel Barnier, the French-born servant of Brussels. In his 1,036 days as the EUs chief negotiator, he has sat for numbing hours opposite Theresa May, haggled with David Davis and Dominic Raab and their junior ministers and faced down countless Whitehall officials. He is the outsider who knows our system inside out. So when he popped up right at the end of the BBCs fly on the wall Storyville documentaries on the Brexit negotiations, I leaned in to listen.
Barnier doesnt do florid, so his words leapt out  It wasnt even Brexit at all. The UK is in a crisis as big as the country itself.
Filmed in March, as it became clear that Britain would not be leaving Europe any time soon, Barnier is shown briefing senior European parliamentarians. This latest breakdown is more than weariness, he tells them. There is a very serious crisis in the UK which  isnt linked to the text of Brexit and even less to the Irish backstop. Its a much deeper crisis. An existential crisis.
Barnier doesnt do florid, so his words leapt out. After almost three years with his eye pressed to a microscope trained on the British elite, here was one of the EUs finest declaring that the real failure wasnt this clause or that loophole. It wasnt even Brexit at all. The UK is in a crisis as big as the country itself.
There are times when some politicians and pundits remember this, when they jerk awake to the reality that the country stands at a moment of reckoning more profound than Suez  one in which our institutions, our economy and our system of representation are all being shown up as simply not up to the job. This week is plainly not one of those times. I watched Barniers remarks on Sunday night, as the first UK results from the European elections began to roll in, showing a far-right party as the clear winner. I woke up to a righteous hailstorm of commentary about What Jeremy Must Say Now and Who Replaces Theresa. Such debates can satisfactorily steam up the sash windows of central London, but set in any context they seem almost recklessly marginal.
We have just been through an election that saw Labour wiped out in Scotland, trounced in Wales, and under siege in London, while the party of government trailed behind the Greens. Between them, the two main parties took less than a quarter of all votes. We can enter more caveats than in any insurance contract  low turnout, protest vote, all the rest  but it hardly changes the bottom line. We are fast approaching the third anniversary of the Brexit referendum and Westminster has still barely bothered to respond to the grievances that drove a result campaigned against by the entirety of the political and economic establishment.
After decades of taking the voters largely for granted, the politicians and pundits cant decide how to respond, so are caught in an elite paralysis. Meanwhile, the public has worked itself up into 