Funimation Streams Code:Breaker, Kamisama Kiss, Jormungand, Psycho-Pass, Robotics;Notes, Oniai
posted on 2012-10-10 00:11 UTC-8 by Crystalyn Hodgkins
All 6 series to premiere on Funimation's website this week

North American anime distributor Funimation announced on Tuesday that it will 
stream the following six television anime series: Code:Breaker, Kamisama Kiss, 
Jormungand Perfect Order, Psycho-Pass, Robotics;Notes, and OniAi.

Code:Breaker will premiere on October 10 at 11:00 a.m EDT, Kamisama Kisswill 
premiere on October 10 at 1:00 p.m. EDT, Jormungand Perfect Order will premiere 
on October 11 at 11:30 a.m. EDT, Psycho-Pass will premiere on October 11 
at 12:45 p.m. EDT, Robotics;Notes will premiere on October 12 at 12:15 p.m. EDT, 
and OniAi will premiere on October 12 at 12:30 p.m. EDT onFunimation's website.

The Code:Breaker "dark hero" television anime series adapts Akimine Kamijyo's 
(Samurai Deeper Kyo) manga. Yasuhiro Irie (Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood,
Kurau: Phantom Memory) is directing the series at the studioKinema Citrus. 
Yukie Akiya will serve as the character designer and chief animation director, 
and Masayuki Sakoi will serve as the assistant director. 
The series stars Nobuhiko Okamoto, Subaru Kimura, Yoko Hikasa, 
Kenichi Suzumura, Toshiyuki Toyonaga, Mitsuki Saiga, and Shinichiro Miki.

Kamisama Hajimemashita (Kamisama Kiss) adapts Julietta Suzuki's original shojomanga. 
The series follows Nanami (voiced by Suzuko Mimori), a girl 
who finds herself homeless after her father leaves. 
She comes to the home of a man (Akira Ishida) who offers to let her 
stay over — only to discover it is a Shinto shrine. 
The man happened to be a deity who has just transferred his status and 
his yokai to Nanami. Akitaro Daichi (Fruits Basket, Kodocha, Now and Then, Here and There) 
is directing the anime at TMS Entertainment (Detective Conan, Lupin III). 
Junko Yamanaka (Detective Conan, KenIchi the Mightiest Disciple) 
is designing the characters. Suzuki launched the manga in Hana to Yume in 2008, 
and Hakusensha published the 12th volume in Japan in April. 
Viz Mediawill publish the 11th volume (under the name Kamisama Kiss) 
in North America in November.

Jormungand Perfect Order is the second season adaptation of Keitaro Takahashi's 
original manga about a female arms dealer and her accomplices. 
The original mangaended this year, and Viz Media will publish the 10th of its 11 volumes 
in North America next January. The first anime season aired earlier this year, 
and Funimation streamed the first season as it aired, and the company has also 
acquired home video rights to the first season.

Psycho-Pass takes place in the near future, when it is possible to instantaneously 
measure and quantify a person's state of mind and personality. 
This information is recorded and processed, and the term "Psycho-Pass" 
in the anime's title refers to a standard used to measure an individual's being. 
The story centers around the "enforcement officer" Shinya Kogami (Tomokazu Seki) 
who is tasked with managing crime in such a world.

The series stars Seki (Card Captor Sakura's Touya, Fate/Zero's Gilgamesh) 
as Shinya Kogami and Kana Hanazawa (Kobato.'s Kobato., Nisemonogatari's Nadeko) 
as Akane Tsunemori. Kenji Nojima (Nobuchika Ginoza), Kinryuu Arimoto (Tomomi Masaoka), 
Akira Ishida (Shusei Kagari), Shizuka Itou (Yayoi Kunizuka), 
Miyuki Sawashiro (Shion Karanomori), and Takahiro Sakurai(Shogo Makishima) 
round out the main cast. The staff includes chief director Katsuyuki Motohiro 
(Space Travelers, live-action Night Head, live-action Antique Bakery, Bayside Shakedown), 
director Naoyoshi Shiotani (Blood+,Tokyo Marble Chocolate), scriptwriter and 
series script editor Gen Urobuchi (Puella Magi Madoka Magica,Fate/Zero), 
original character designer Akira Amano (Reborn!), and others.

Robotics;Notes adapts the PlayStation 3 game of the same name by the makers of 
Steins;Gate and Chaos;HEAd. The third "science adventure game" is set in an alternate 
future world after Tokyo's Shibuya district was destroyed in 2009, followed by the 
destruction of the Radio Kaikan building in Tokyo's Akihabara a year later. 
The world is immersed in realistic augmented reality technology in 2019, 
but a high school robotics club is in danger of being disbanded after shrinking 
to just two members. The club's revival is tied to the robot it is building.

The game and anime's shared cast includes Ryohei Kimura (Kaito Yashio), 
Yoshino Nanjo (Akiho Senomiya), Rie Kugimiya (Airi), Kaori Nazuka (Frau Koujiro), 
Yoshimasa Hosoya (Subaru Hidaka), and Sora Tokui (JUNNA Daitoku). 
Kazuya Nomura ( Sengoku Basara: Samurai Kings 2) is directing the anime at 
Production I.G. Jukki Hanada (My Ordinary Life, sola,Steins;Gate) is in charge 
of the series scripts under the supervision of the game's Tatsuya Matsubara 
and Naotaka Hayashi. Chikashi Kubota (Shikabane Hime: Aka, From the New World) 
is adapting Tomonori Fukuda's original game character designs for the anime. 
The original game's Takeshi Abo is scoring the music with television composer Yuki Hayashi.

OniAi adapts Daisuke Suzuki's Onii-chan Dakedo Ai Sae Areba Kankei Nai yo ne 
light novel series. The story centers around Akito Himenokoji (Ryota Ohsaka), 
a boy who was separated from his twin sister Akiko (Kido) six years ago, 
but they end up living under the same roof together during high school. 
Keiichiro Kawaguchi is directing the series at studio SILVER LINK. 
The series stars Ibuki Kido, Ryota Ohsaka, Asami Shimoda, Eri Kitamura, 
Megumi Takamoto, Minori Chihara, and Sumire Morohoshi.
