Pyjamas in the freezer! How to keep cool in scorching Europe heatwave
Authorities advise checking on neighbours and even putting pyjamas in the freezer before bedtime during the week-long heatwave.
By Lucia Binding, news reporter

Temperatures are soaring across Europe, with highs of 40C (104F) forecast in some parts of the continent over the coming days.

Areas of France, Germany, Spain and Italy are expected to be the worst hit, as hot winds from the Sahara blow low in across the continent from Wednesday.

French President Emmanuel Macron said that "vigilance" was the watchword of the week as measures are in place to protect the most vulnerable.

Here are some of the best ways to stay cool in the sweltering heat this week, advised by forecasters and authorities across Europe.

1
Drink plenty of water
It may seem like an obvious one, but drinking plenty of water is often overlooked. Cool down from the inside out by staying hydrated with plenty of liquids. It is recommended to drink between 1.5 and 2 litres per day. 

2
Avoid alcohol
Bad news for some, but forecasters advise against drinking alcohol in the intense heat, as well as teas and coffees, which act as diuretics and can cause dehydration. 

3
Pyjamas in the freezer
Before going to bed, place your pillow case or pyjamas in the freezer, which will help you fall asleep keep cool during the night.

4
Check on neighbours
Stay in frequent contact with vulnerable friends, relatives and neighbours during the heatwave, which will prove challenging for the elderly, children and people with underlying illnesses. "Our message this week is simple: look after yourself, your family and your neighbours. A phone call or a knock on the door could save a life," said Dr Davron Mukhamadiev of The Red Cross federation. 

5
Swim to cool down
Avoid physical activities during the day. However, swimming is a great way to cool down. Authorities in Paris have triggered emergency measures to help people cope with the extreme temperatures, such as opening swimming pools and parks later than usual.

6
Stay indoors
Authorities issued warnings urging children and the elderly to stay indoors as much as possible, especially between 11am and 9pm. If you have to go out, be sure to wear light fabric such as cotton to let your skin breathe. 

7
Shut windows and blinds
Close the windows and blinds while it is still relatively cool outside. It is advised to keep them closed until after the sun has set, opening them shortly before going to bed and closing them when you wake up.

8
Carry an umbrella
It is advised to avoid direct sunlight altogether during the intense heatwave, but if you have to go out, make sure to wear sunscreen and a hat, and carry an umbrella to block all rays.
