Hanabee Announces New Acquisitions at Supanova Adelaide 2012
posted on 2012-11-18 12:00 UTC-8 by Jon Hayward
New Australian distributor announces the following titles at Supanova Adelaide 2012;

Acquisition Summary
•	Gyo: March 2013 release.
•	.hack//G.U. Trilogy: February 2013 release.
•	Hakuoki (TV): March 2013 release.
Acquisition Descriptions

Hakuoki
The anime adapts Idea Factory's Hakuoki Shinsengumi Kitan romance adventure game from 
Otomate, Idea Factory's brand aimed at female players. 
The story of the game and its anime adaptation center around the historical 
Shinsengumi samurai group in Kyoto during the 19th century. 
Chizuru Yukimura has come to Kyoto looking for her father and 
witnesses a fight between the Oni and the Shinsengumi. 
Upon taking Chizuru into custody the Shinsengumi discover that her father and 
the doctor they are hunting are one and the same and bring her along in their search.
The twelve episode series was produced by Studio DEEN 
(Hetalia - Axis Powers,Rurouni Kenshin) in 2010 under direction from Osamu Yamasaki. 
The original concept was by Tsunekiyo Fujisawa with original character design 
by Yone Kazukiand characte design by Atsuko Nakajima (Getbackers, Trinity Blood).
The Hakuoki anime franchise includes the 12-episode Hakuoki series, 
the 10-episode sequel series Hakuoki Hekketsu-roku, 
and the 6-episode Hakuoki Sekkaroku OAV series. 
The franchise also includes an upcomingprequel television anime series 
and two upcoming films that will premiere in 2013. 
Sentail Filmworks acquired thefranchise for US release earlier in the year and 
has already released the first season bilingually on DVD.
Hakuoki will be released on DVD in March 2013.

.hack//G.U. Trilogy
.hack//G.U. Trilogy adapts the .hack/G.U. series of video games 
(.hack//G.U. Vol. 1: Rebirth, .hack//G.U. Vol. 2: Reminisce and .hack//G.U. Vol. 3: Redemption). 
The trilogy is set in The World, a large and popular MMO that has fallen on hard times 
due to the actions of it's parent company, CC Corp. 
Haseo is one of these players, he spends his time hunting down Player Killers 
to gain revenge against a player known as Tri-Edge and to wake his friend Shino from a coma. 
During his travels he meets Atoli, a healer that resembles Shino, who joins Haseo 
in his quest to discover the mystery behind the comas and the entities known as AIDA.
The CG high-def movie was produced by CyberConnect2 under direction from 
Hiroshi Matsuyama (.hack//The Movie) with a screenplay by Hiroto Niizato and Saeko Hirotsu. 
The voice talent includes Ayako Kawasumi as Atoli and Takahiro Sakurai as Haseo. 
Bandai Entertainment previously released the sub in the US. 
Madman Entertainment has previously released many of the .hack titles in Australia 
including .hack//Legend of the Twilightmanga and anime) .hack//Quantum, .hack//Roots and .hack//SIGN.
.hack//G.U. Trilogy will be released in February 2013.

Gyo
Gyo is based on the manga of the same name by Junji Ito (Tomie, Uzumaki). 
In Okinawa, foul smelling fish have started to walk out of the ocean and onto land, 
heading towards the cities. 
A girl named Kaori loses contact with Tadasho, her boyfriend in Tokyo 
and sets out to locate him.
The OVA was produced in 2012 by ufotable using a script by Akihiro Yoshida(Fate/Zero) 
and Script / Direction by Takayuki Hirao (Gakuen Utopia Manabi Straight!).
Gyo will be released on DVD in March 2013.

While ANN|AU was unable to attend the panel in question, 
the news was posted by Hanabee on it's official twitter account and on their facebook page.

