Lawmakers eye task force to study growing popularity of cricket in New York
ALBANY — Most New Yorkers don’t know a googly from a wicket, but that could soon change.

Enthusiasts say interest in cricket, a 500-year-old English pastime, is growing with an influx of immigrants who grew up with the game and a swell of leagues across the state. Now, lawmakers hoping to see how much momentum the sport is gaining are creating the Empire State Cricket Task Force to conduct a study and create strategies to promote cricket, the second-most-popular sport in the world.

“After soccer, cricket is the most watched, most played sport in the world," said Ashok Adikoppula, founder of the Capital District Cricket Association.

The 36-year-old business analyst said his upstate league grew from a few dozen players less than a decade ago to more than 250 people.

Cricket is played with two teams of 11 players who take turns batting with a flat-sided bat and playing the field. The bowler, like a pitcher in baseball, attempts to knock down a wooden wicket behind a batter, known as a batsman. A googly is a type of breaking pitch.

Traditionally, games can go on for days as each player has a turn at bat, but a shorter version that lasts roughly three hours and the advent of leagues have helped the sport gain traction with a working-class crowd.
Albany lawmakers are hoping to promote the sport and keep the state at the forefront of its growth. A bill sponsored by Assemblywoman Nily Rozic (D-Queens) and Sen. Kevin Thomas (D-Nassau County) would task a five-person panel with doing just that. It is expected to pass the Assembly next week and is scheduled for a floor vote in the Senate.

“New Yorkers already welcome and support cricket with great enthusiasm. Cricket brings with it a massive audience—the second largest in the world—and economic development opportunities," Rozic said. "With the growth of numerous leagues across New York, the creation of a Cricket Task Force would benefit the sport and help it grow and thrive.”

Immigrants and ex-pats from former British colonies in South Asian, Caribbean and Middle Eastern countries have been the driving force behind the sport’s rise, according to James Persaud of the New York Softball Cricket League.

“Especially New York City, there is a very diverse population and over the last 10 to 15 years there has been a great increase in interest in the sport,” he said.

The nonprofit league is open to men and women who play in Brooklyn and Queens parks, and it will host teams from around the country at the end of the month for its annual New York Independence Cup.

Persaud said there’s plenty of room for investment in similar leagues across the state that could help the sport gain a foothold.

“We’re mostly using baseball facilities,” he said. “That’s definitely the biggest issue. We need more actual cricket fields to play on.”

The city Parks Department maintains 60 cricket pitches in the five boroughs. Seven parks in Queens allow New Yorkers to reserve sites for the game, often spaces shared with baseball diamonds or soccer fields. Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx boasts 12 cricket fields on its parade ground.

Last year, 3,140 permitted cricket matches were played in city parks. So far this year, the Parks Department has issued 3,030 permits.

The Roy A. Sweeney Cricket Oval in Brooklyn, the city’s first official cricket field, is tucked in a corner of Spring Creek Park. It’s wedged between the Belt Parkway, Hendrix Creek and the Gateway Center shopping mall and named after a man who spent decades promoting the sport in the Big Apple.

New York already has a place in cricket history for having hosted the sport’s first international match in 1844.

A U.S. team, made up mostly of British ex-pats, took on Canada at the St George’s Cricket Club grounds at what is now 30th St. and Broadway. Canada won by 23 runs.

Persaud believes the state task force could once again make New York central to a beloved pastime.

“Anything that opens the sport up to more people will be beneficial,” he said.