‘Hadestown’ wins Tony for best musical, 'The Ferryman’ named best play, and Elaine May wins her first acting Tony at age 87 in star-studded Radio City award show
 “Hadestown,” a stylized, bluesy, steampunk-influenced Anais Mitchell musical based on the ancient Greek myth in which Orpheus tries to rescue his love from the underworld, beat out its more traditional rival “Tootsie” to win the Tony Award for best musical at Radio City Musical Hall on Sunday night.
“Hadestown” triumphed at the 2019 Tonys, even as “The Ferryman,” a juicy, eye-popping Jez Butterworth epic about familial agony amidst the Irish “troubles” dominated the year’s strong slate of plays. “The Ferryman” won the Tony Award for best play.
There also were Tonys for performers Stephanie J. Block, the indefatigable star of “The Cher Show,” for Santino Fontana, the formidable performer who played both Michael Dorsey and his alter-ego Dorothy Michaels in “Tootsie,” and for the 87-year-old Elaine May, star of the revival of “The Waverly Gallery.”
"At the end of the play I die," May said, evoking the octogenarian free pass when it comes to spoilers.
Bryan Cranston, a winner for his leading performance in the play “Network” used his speech to pay tribute to journalists and say that “the media is not the enemy of the people. Demagoguery is the enemy of the people.” 
And Ali Stroker, who plays Ado Annie in the Tony-winning musical revival of “Oklahoma!” won a ground-breaking supporting actress Tony, becoming the first performer who uses a wheelchair to win a Tony, and, in the process, clearly rising to a new status as a bona fide Broadway star.
"This award is for every person who has a disability or a limitation or a challenge who have been waiting to see themselves in this arena," Stroker said, after the Radio City audience had risen to its feet.
In the Tony press room after her award, Stroker said that producers and theater owners had made the public spaces of their theater accessible for the public but had not yet done the same for the backstage areas where performers must reside.
Big individual winners from "Hadestown" included Rachel Chavkin, the winner for best director of a musical; Mitchell for best score; scenic designer Rachel Houck, lighting designer Bradley King, and the orchestrators Michael Chorney and Todd Sickafoose.
In the category of best supporting actor in a musical, veteran performer Andre De Shields, who won his first Tony Award at the age of 73, accepted his Tony for “Hadestown” by delivering an emotional speech about resilience in the American theater.
“The top of one mountain is the bottom of the next so keep climbing,” De Shields said, elegantly attired in golden, bewigged footwear and with his famous coif seemingly in celebratory fettle. 
"Hadestown" also produced not only the first woman ever to be nominated for a Tony in the category of best sound design in a musical, but, as of Sunday night, Jessica Paz (honored alongside her colleague and co-winner Nevin Steinberg) became the first sound-designing woman ever to win one.
Block, a winner for “The Cher Show” won her first Tony despite a long career in Broadway musicals. “I have always been a theater nerd,” she said. “This is not a speech — it is a journal entry from when I was 12 or 13.”
Celia Keenan-Bolger, a longtime Broadway favorite, won her first Tony Award — best supporting actress in a play — for playing Scout in the Broadway revival of “To Kill a Mockingbird,” a character Bolger described as the “greatest literary heroine of all time.” 
There also was a nod for Sergio Trujillo, the winner of best choreography for his work on “Ain’t Too Proud,” the musical celebrating The Temptations.
