
The great British tea test: which part of the country brings us the very best brew?
As a proud Lancastrian, I ought to favour my local blend in a taste test with rivals from Yorkshire and beyond. However 

Helen Pidd


Thu 20 Jun 2019 08.00BST


Last modified on Thu 20 Jun 2019 10.33BST


I made the mistake of buying some Lancashire Tea bags recently. It seemed like the right thing to do at the time. I was born in Lancaster  and they were on offer in Morrisons.
What a disappointment. We Lancastrians may have won the Wars of the Roses* and be vastly better at football than our transpennine rivals, but, by eck, the brew bearing my countys name is an insipid affair. More than once I had to go back to the cupboard and check I hadnt picked up a decaf bag in error. Lancashire Tea is murky. It has a sinister tinge of that slightly bruised purple you get when suffering a tea with the good stuff removed.
Chances are, you have never tried Lancashire Tea. You probably didnt even know it was a thing. It has only existed since 2002, when Paul Needham and Lynn Hitchen looked enviously at the success of Yorkshire Tea and decided to copy the gimmick over on the rainy side of the M62.
It is, I would argue, a bit of a swizz. The website gives little away, but moderate sleuthing reveals it is not even boxed in Lancashire. They blend it in Newton-le-Willows, St Helens, which hasnt been in Lancashire since 1974. I guess Merseyside Tea doesnt carry convey quite the same romance.
Of course pretty much all British tea is a con. Yorkshire Tea, like most of its rivals, is grown in various plantations in Assam, India, and east Africa  a fact that occasionally surprises devotees, such as the Twitter user who called for a boycott after discovering his favourite brew was not as homegrown as he thought. YORKSHIRE SOIL MAKES THE BEST TEA [three union jack emojis] tweeted @FleetwoodTerryO, a self-declared patriot last year. When the truth was pointed out, he was not amused: WHY CALL IT YORKSHIRE TEA IF ITS NOT GROWN IN YORKSHIRE. WONT BE BUYING FROM YOU AGAIN.
It was all excellent viral marketing for Yorkshire Tea, which used the resulting publicity to clarify that the tea is in fact only blended in Yorkshire, before being shipped around the country.
Despite living in Stockport (the west, correct, side of the Pennines), I drink Yorkshire Tea. Its strong and northern, like me. We dont even keep it local in the Guardians Manchester office, despite the papers 198-year foundations in the historic county of Lancashire. We too buy the Tykes tea, in 3kg sacks from our stationery supplier.
But is Yorkshire Tea really the nations finest mass-produced regional chai? I decided to find out, with the help of Jimmy Green, an ex-military man who became addicted to tea when serving in Hong Kong alongside teetotal Gurkhas. He runs Tea from the Manor, which blends loose-leaf teas for hotels across the north-west.
He invites me to his office, in an unpromising oblong building on an industrial estate in Denton, Greater Manchester. Appearances deceive. Inside is a tea lovers paradise. His desk is made of tea chests and two walls are packed floor-to-ceiling with his blends, which include everything from traditional oolong (a superstrong Chinese number only for the hardcore) 