7 Ways to Improve VoIP Call Quality
If you've purchased a business Voice-over-IP Opens a New Window.  (VoIP) phone service, then you're undoubtedly savoring the bliss of lower calling rates as well as integrating your phone data with your other business applications, especially your customer relationship management (CRM) software and your help desk operation.

But the core metric by which you'll continue to measure VoIP success is, well, voice. Is the call quality still as good as it was before you digitized your phone? If conversations are garbled or drop sporadically, all the other benefits of VoIP really don't mean much. Fortunately, solutions such as Editors' Choice tools Intermedia Unite Opens a New Window.  and RingCentral Opens a New Window. generally offer incredible voice quality. Even mid-tier solutions tend to show a marked improvement over local telco systems and smartphones. But a lot of that quality depends on more than how the VoIP vendor engineered their solution. Much of it rests on the underlying network, and that's a combination of your IT staff and your Internet provider. Thankfully, we've put together this list of potential problems and solutions to keep your business calls clear and garble-free.

However, before you continue investing time and effort making adjustments to your hardware and network, it might be prudent for you to contact your VoIP service provider. Their customer service engineers might be able to pinpoint your specific problem and offer you a fix much faster than a general IT staffer who doesn't deal with VoIP issues every day. You should also contact your internet service provider (ISP) to ensure they're not suffering a major broadband meltdown. If both of those calls prove fruitless, or if you've already spent too many hours listening to the sweet sounds of hold music, try the following six recommendations.

1. Jitter Ju Jitsu

More From PCmag
Huawei, Russian Telecom Firm Ink Deal to Build 5G Network Opens a New Window.
How West Hollywood Flipped the Smart City Switch Opens a New Window.
VoIP and UCaaS: The Differences Explained Opens a New Window.
Why Your Business VoIP System Might Not Belong in the Cloud Opens a New Window.
Cisco Opens a New Window.  has a wonderful explanation of what jitter is and how it can impact your VoIP call quality. Essentially, voice data is sent through your network in packets organized in chronological order. According to Cisco, "network congestion, improper queuing, or configuration errors" can cause delays in how these packets are organized and received.

In order to fix the issue, upgrade your Ethernet cord to a Category 6 Opens a New Window.  (CAT6) cable. Your VoIP provider may have given you a previous-generation Category 5 (CAT5) cable, which only supports about 125 MHz, while CAT6 cables can transmit data at around 250 MHz. This is the easiest fix. For minor VoIP issues, this trick should solve your problem.

If the new cable doesn't unjitter your jitters, then try implementing a jitter buffer. Your VoIP vendor will happily help you configure a buffer, which will temporarily store your data packets in the sequence in which they are received, and then transmit those packets into your network in evenly spaced intervals. This will help to deliver voice data in a manner that is more accurate to how it was spoken.

2. Buy a New Headset
VoIP headsets range in price from really cheap $1 earpieces Opens a New Window.  to $400 luxury headsets Opens a New Window. . You wouldn't expect your favorite recording artist to mix an album using a cheap set of headphones, though, so why would you manage your business with a cruddy VoIP headset? When choosing a headset, there are a bunch of factors to consider. For one, if call quality is your main concern, choose noise-cancelling headphones that deliver sound in both ears. Corded and USB headsets typically deliver more stable sound quality than wireless or Bluetooth headsets

3. Buy a VoIP-Optimized Router
Don't let your standard home or small business router transmit your business VoIP calls. You should buy a router that expressly prioritizes VoIP traffic over other types of internet data. These routers can be as inexpensive as $200 for small businesses or as expensive as $3,000 for more heavy-duty use. It's also important that your router supports the Session Initiation Protocol Opens a New Window.  (SIP), which helps to deliver data reliably between the client and the server. You'll also want virtual LAN Opens a New Window.  (VLAN) support, which helps to group and disperse data based on where latency is lowest.

4. Monitor Your Network Traffic
As previously mentioned, the amount of bandwidth being used on your network will have an impact on your call audio. If jitter buffers don't solve your problem, try protecting your VoIP traffic stream. IT professionals can use most any network monitoring Opens a New Window.  tool to identify which packet streams on their networks are carrying VoIP data. That allows them to tag that traffic and protect it in a number of ways. In small business settings, one of the most popular methods is to employ Quality of Service Opens a New Window.  (QoS) protection on tagged VoIP data. Essentially, this lets an IT pro dedicate a portion of your overall bandwidth (let's say 10 percent) to carrying VoIP. That 10 percent will always be there for your voice traffic no matter what anyone else is doing on the network.

5. Interference Clearance
Phones with higher GHz frequencies tend to produce interference. Your typical VoIP phone runs at 2.4 GHz. However, there are also 5.8-GHz phones on the market as well as a variety of 5-GHz devices, including VoIP equipment. In general, the 2.4-GHz band gives you a longer range but its data throughput is slower. The 5-GHz band provides less coverage, but where it does cover, data will flow faster.

If you're experiencing interference, then check to see on which frequency your phone runs. If you've got a 5.8-GHz phone, then switch to a 2.4-GHz phone (some phones even let you choose). Also, most home and small business routers Opens a New Window. , as well as most Wi-Fi range extenders, offer the ability to either choose whether to run in the 2.4-GHz versus 5-GHz spectrums or run both simultaneously, allowing you to choose which traffic will run in which spectrum. Check with your VoIP provider's service technicians and ask about optimal performance for their particular platform.

6. Standardize Your Mobile VoIP
Communicating on the go is something most businesses, even smaller ones, need to address. Some folks need to make sure their smartphone Opens a New Window.  rings when someone dials their desk extension if they're at home or on the road; others simply need to make sure they can wander around the office or campus with a fully functioning headset in their ear. To keep call quality good, you'll want to look at all of the ways your employees are conducting their mobile conversations, and then look to standardize.

For those looking to wander the office, consider a Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications Opens a New Window.  (DECT) phone. Because these phones essentially utilize their own spectrum, using one to access your VoIP system means less chance of interference from other wireless sources. And depending on which VoIP vendor you've chosen, you may be able to opt for a DECT phone that's available through that vendor, which means fewer installation hassles. For some in-system configurations, it's just a matter of plugging the phone into an open USB port on the host system.

If you're one of those who needs their smartphone to ring when their desk phone is dialed, contact your VoIP provider and see what they've got in the way of a softphone or call forwarding options. The softphone is usually the more attractive option as these are software apps that turn whatever they're running on into something that can take and make VoIP phone calls. This way, you can conduct conversations, shared meetings, and other collaborative tasks using your desktop, your notebook, or a wide variety of mobile devices, especially smartphones. Using the softphone built by your VoIP provider guarantees full compatibility with your phone service and also means their customer service technicians will have an easier time identifying and solving problems. These days, some vendors, such as Dialpad Opens a New Window. , have eliminated hardware phones entirely, opting to offer their entire service portfolio via software.

7. If All Else Fails, Hire an Expert
Sure, DIY is part of modern VoIP's attraction. Even business-grade VoIP providers often tout how easy it is to "get up and running fast." And as we saw when we tested these products Opens a New Window. , that's mostly true. But when you've hit a performance snag where calls are garbled or even dropping sometimes, and you've exhausted both your in-house expertise and your customer service rep's calling script, it's time to think about hiring outside help.

Fortunately, today's VoIP consultants can do a lot more than simply install and maintain a VoIP system. These companies typically also work on optimizing your Wi-Fi network coverage as that's often part and parcel of a top performing VoIP system. And they can help with getting your communications to the next level by implementing advanced features, such as securing your call data and transmissions, automating shared meetings and scheduling, designing a full-functioning auto-attendant (aka an Interactive Voice Response Opens a New Window. or IVR system, something most business VoIP systems can do as long as you're willing to put in the time to set it up), developing custom integrations with your other back-end software, and even setting up call analytics and dashboards, not just for billing, but for marketing and sales, too.

Sure, hiring help will cost money, but as long as you take the time to fully investigate what your chosen consultant can do, you'll be getting a lot of bang for your buck.