Why not smash stuff on your next trip to Las Vegas?
#Travel
Las Vegas (CNN) — There's nothing like bashing a computer monitor with a sledgehammer to pulverize the stresses of everyday life.
That's the concept behind so-called "rage rooms" that allow visitors and locals alike to take out their frustrations on various materials otherwise headed for a dump.
They're part of a larger trend across the United States of businesses that provide safe environments for participants to destroy electronics, furniture, glass bottles and other household items. At last check, more than 60 such facilities can be found across the country.
Las Vegas has three spots where you can release aggression by destroying stuff when you travel here.
One is part of Axe Monkeys, a destination where you also can throw axes at a target.
Another, Wreck Room, allows up to six ragers at a time.
Sin City Smash offers a chance for participants to wield chain-wrapped baseball bats or lug wrenches and shake off gambling losses by destroying blackjack tables and poker chips.
"It's great form of stress therapy," says Anna Guiao, owner of Sin City Smash. "A lot of people come in here worried about something and leave feeling better, calmer and free."
Rage as release
Fans of the 1999 movie "Office Space" might remember a scene in which three of the main characters take out work-related aggression by destroying a finicky printer/fax machine that has contributed to some of their stress.
Rage rooms essentially provide the same experience, only in a controlled environment.
Owners say the philosophy behind the experience has roots in destruction therapy, a stress-management technique that began in Spain in the early 2000s. They say the facilities empower guests to express anger in positive ways. Some of their websites even cite studies that list long-term physical effects of pent-up anger, such as increased anxiety, high blood pressure and headaches.
How people get their rage on
In Las Vegas, most rage room experiences follow a similar formula.
Participants can book anywhere from five to 30 minutes in the room. When you arrive on-site, you check in and select a weapon from arsenals that include sledgehammers, lug wrenches, golf clubs, baseball bats and maces.
From there, a rage monitor leads you to an area where he or she instructs you to don a full-body safety suit, gloves, a hard hat with ear protectors, face shield and steel-toed boot covers.
A safety talk follows, with warnings never to position yourself downswing from a fellow participant and never to take off the hard hat. Next, you select music for the session—heavy metal, gangsta rap and classical all are popular choices.
Finally, the monitor leads you into the room, where you come upon a makeshift table adorned with material to smash. After a brief pause for pictures, the music starts playing and the timer begins.
