Trump Docket: New justice could sway court on president's personal cases
'Senators are going to ask the nominee about this. There's no question about it.'

By JOSH GERSTEIN 07/05/2018 05:07 AM EDT
A pile of pending lawsuits over Donald Trump's personal and business conduct could put his nominee to the Supreme Court in an awkward position: deciding whether to cast potentially pivotal votes on legal matters of keen importance to the president.

Virtually all justices wind up ruling on policy issues affecting the president who appointed them. But Trump is enmeshed in more than half a dozen significant court cases involving everything from his alleged sexual behavior before taking office to claims that his businesses are profiting from his presidency and allegations that he misused funds through his charitable foundation.


In addition, the Supreme Court could be asked to rule on other legal questions critical to the president, such as whether Robert Mueller's probe of Russian interference in the 2016 election was legally authorized or whether Trump has the authority to dismiss the special prosecutor.

The legal pressure Trump faces on many fronts is likely to spill into the confirmation hearings for his nominee — whom he is expected to name next week to replace retiring Justice Anthony Kennedy, long seen as the court's swing vote — as senators seek to use the high-profile platform to publicize the unusual legal predicaments.

"Senators are going to ask the nominee about this. There's no question about it," said Josh Blackman, a professor at South Texas College of Law. "The big one, I think, is the question of what happens if Trump decided to fire Mueller."

"It’s one place where the Democrats may get some traction," University of Richmond law professor Carl Tobias said of the Russia-related questions that could come before the court. "It does seem like a conflict to a lot of people. Is a person handpicked by the president going to be objective about the person who nominated him?"