Charlottesville car fiend begs judge for mercy and shorter sentence
The Ohio man who drove his car into a group of counter-protesters at a “Unite the Right” rally in Charlottesville, Va., in 2017, has asked a judge for mercy and to be granted a sentence shorter than life in prison.
Lawyers for James Fields Jr., 22, said in court documents Friday that he should not spend his entire life in prison. They cited his age, a traumatic childhood and history of mental illnesses as reasons for the request.
“No amount of punishment imposed on James can repair the damage he caused to dozens of innocent people. But this court should find that retribution has limits,” Fields’ attorneys wrote.
They said giving him a sentence less than life in prison would be akin to an “expression of mercy” and a “conviction that no individual is wholly defined by their worst moments.”
Man who drove his car into Charlottesville rally, killing Heather Heyer, changes plea to guilty and avoids death penalty »
Prosecutors argued on Friday that the self-proclaimed white supremacist does indeed deserve a life sentence and that he’s shown a lack or remorse for his actions. They believe the sentence will deter “similar acts of domestic terrorism.”
On Aug. 12, 2017, Fields drove his Dodge Challenger downhill on a one-way street and “rapidly accelerated” as he drove into a crowd of counter-protesters. He injured dozens and killed Heather Heyer, a 32-year-old activist and paralegal.
Fields pleaded guilty to federal hate crimes in March, avoiding the death penalty. He’s set to be sentenced on June 28.
James Fields, the man who drove his Dodge Challenger into a group of counterprotesters at a “Unite the Right” rally in Charlottesville, Va., in 2017, killing a woman, will avoid the death penalty.
The 21-year-old Ohio native changed his plea from not guilty to guilty in federal court in Charlottesville on Wednesday afternoon.
He pleaded guilty to 29 federal hate crime charges, including one count of a hate crime act resulting in death and 28 counts of a hate crime act involving attempt to kill.
The 30th charge he faced was one count of bias-motivated interference with a federally protected activity resulting in death. That count, punishable by death, was dropped as part of the plea deal.
He had previously pleaded not guilty to all 30 counts.
Fields was convicted by a Virginia jury in December 2018 of first-degree murder in the death of Heather Heyer, a 32-year-old activist and paralegal.
In addition to the murder charge, Fields was convicted of five counts of aggravated malicious wounding, three counts of malicious wounding and one count of failing to stop at an accident involving a death.
The jury recommended life in prison plus 419 years at the December sentencing. Judge Richard Moore will decide on Fields’ punishment for the state charges in July.
On Aug. 11, 2017, as Fields got ready to leave his home in Ohio for the rally, a family member sent him a text telling him to be careful. He responded, “We’re not the ones who need to be careful” along with a photo of Adolf Hitler, a copy of his indictment shows.
A day later in Charlottesville, Fields drove his car downhill on a narrow one-way street and stopped as he approached a “racially and ethnically diverse crowd” chanting and carrying signs to protest against the Unite the Right” rally Fields was part of. He backed his car up to the top of the hill and “rapidly accelerated," plowing through dozens of people and killing Heyer.