Super Smash Bros. Ultimate Release Date And Switch Pre-Order Guide
Lock in your pre-order now.
Last updated by Chris Reed and Aiden Strawhun on July 2, 2018 at 12:55PM
The list of things in life that are totally dependable is short, but it contains things like death, taxes, and a new Smash Bros. game on every Nintendo console. Nintendo's latest hardware is no exception--the company has announced that Super Smash Bros. will be coming to Nintendo Switch on December 7, 2018.
There's still a lot to learn about the game, but we have learned it will boast a massive roster comprised of every character seen in the series to date--including Snake. Beyond that, Ridley is also being introduced as a new character alongside Splatoon's Inklings, who were showcased during the initial reveal. Another change of note is support for all Smash Bros. Amiibo figures and the ability to select a stage before choosing characters.
If you're one of the many people looking to pre-order Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo Switch, you've come to the right place. We've gathered all the information you need about the pre-order bonuses, special editions, and pricing below.
No Pre-Order Bonuses
Nintendo has not announced any pre-order bonuses for Super Smash Bros. for Switch. Some retailers are offering discounts for pre-ordering the game, which you can find below.
No Special Editions
As yet, Nintendo has not announced a special edition of Super Smash Bros. for Switch. If that happens, we'll update this article.
Pre-Order Super Smash Bros. for Switch
And now for the goods: Here's where you can pre-order Super Smash Bros. for Switch and how much it costs. Note that Amazon Prime members currently get the best deal, with $12 taken off the standard retail price. But if you set up a free My Best Buy account, you can get a $10 reward certificate for pre-ordering at the big blue retailer.
Amazon -- $60 ($48 with Amazon Prime)
Best Buy -- $60 ($10 rewards certificate)
GameStop -- $60
Target -- $60
Walmart -- $60
Eshop -- $60
Some links to supporting retailers are automatically made into affiliate links, and GameSpot may receive a small share of those sales.