Instagram wants more digital video viewers
This story was delivered to Business Insider Intelligence "Digital Media Briefing" subscribers hours before appearing on Business Insider. To be the first to know, please click here.

Instagram rolled out a new hub for long-form content that hosts videos of up to one hour in length. The video hub, called IGTV, can be accessed on the top right section of users' Instagram home screen, and is also available as a standalone app. IGTV greatly increases the video sharing capabilities on Instagram: Previously, users could post videos up to one minute long on Instagram.
Although any account can upload videos to the section, IGTV is focused on hosting content from creators, with initial high-profile users including Kim Kardashian West, Kevin Hart, and others. IGTV currently doesn't run ads, but Instagram CEO Kevin Systrom mentioned ads could be a "very reasonable place to end up."

Instagram's long-form video section could ultimately become an important location for media companies and brands to distribute content:

IGTV can draw from Instagram's user base of 1 billion monthly active users. Although not all of these users will watch IGTV content, Instagrammers have consumed 60% more video over the past year, according to Systrom, indicating there's a growing demand for video on the platform. Even if just 10% of Instagram's monthly users (100 million) end up regularly using IGTV, the maximum audience of the section would still be sizable. Media companies could use IGTV to distribute mini-series as a way of generating interest and driving viewership to their programming on linear TV.
IGTV differentiates itself from YouTube and Snapchat in the format and length of its content. Unlike YouTube, IGTV is designed to be mobile-first and will only host vertical videos. And IGTV's one-hour video time limit is much longer than the length of Snapchat's professionally produced shows, which typically have episodes that run between three and five minutes. That novelty may attract influencers looking to push their creative boundaries, and their viewers might follow, potentially springing a broader array of sponsorship opportunities for brands.
At the same time, it's still early days for IGTV and it may take some time for users to get acquainted with the long-form vertical-only video format. The mobile-first vertical video format for long content is relatively untested and faces some barriers. YouTube, the most popular online video site, hosts vertically oriented videos but largely offers videos that are in the landscape format, for example.

And data-conscious consumers may be hesitant to stream an hour-long video on the go. Nonetheless, the potential audience of IGTV is likely too large to ignore, so media companies and brands may choose to invest in creating content for the medium to see how consumers respond.

Leading the pivot to video are the major social platforms — Facebook, Instagram, and Snapchat — as well as YouTube, the early pioneer in digital video. These platforms are increasingly prioritizing video on their properties, and also moving to secure high-quality original programming that mimics TV. Meanwhile, publishers and other media companies, brands, and advertisers are all swept up in the tide and are reorganizing their operations to focus on video.

The ultimate goal of these digital video companies is to create a market that can complement (or rival) and eventually surpass that of traditional TV. Although these leading social platforms are all-in on video, they each approach the space differently. Facebook's game plan differs from Snap's, which differs from YouTube's. Understanding these nuances is important for industry participants.

Business Insider Intelligence, Business Insider's premium research service, has put together a detailed report on social video that:

Assesses the evolving social video landscape, with attention to Facebook, YouTube, Snap, and Instagram.
Analyzes the relative strengths of each platform from a product, distribution, audience, and monetization perspective.
Looks at what's next for the industry, so that media creators and brands can invest for the future.