Europe heatwave: Where is the hot weather coming from and when will it end?

By Lucia Binding, news reporter and Christopher England, weather producer
A heatwave is spreading across Europe, bringing temperatures of up to 45C (113F) as the so-called Sahara Bubble hits.

Meteorologists say hot winds from the north African desert have brought the unusually hot June weather, which has caused school closures in France and increased the risk of forest fires in north-eastern Germany.

Germany, Poland and Czech Republic broke their June records on Wednesday.

Why is the heatwave settling across Europe?
The heat is mostly coming up from the Mediterranean and North Africa due to a high pressure system over the UK and off its east coast.

Met Office forecaster Matthew Box described the hot air from the Sahara as an "enormous reservoir" that has engulfed the continent.

Temperatures are due to rise even further, peaking on Saturday.

What has the response been?
The weather warnings have already triggered emergency measures in France, with temporary fountains put in place and plans for public pools to stay open for longer.

National weather agency Meteo-France placed 53 counties on an orange warning - the second-highest alert, meaning potentially dangerous conditions requiring public vigilance - as temperatures are expected to reach up to 40C (104F) in some areas.

Exams have been postponed from Thursday and Friday, when the heat is expected to peak, after education minister Jean-Michel Blanquer concluded it would be too hot.

Germany's eastern Saxony-Anhalt state has imposed speed limits of 62mph or 75mph on several short stretches of the autobahn until further notice after fears the surface may crack in the heat.

Parts of northeastern Spain are predicted to reach 45C (113F) on Friday. Officials warned of an "extreme" risk of forest fires in some areas.

A tweet that went viral earlier in the week from Spanish meteorologist Silvia Laplana described the situation as "hell".

She added: "Of course in summer it is hot, but when we talk about a heatwave so extensive and intense, which, predictably, will break records, that is NOT normal."

Professor Hannah Cloke, a natural hazards researcher at the University of Reading, said the heatwave, with a build-up of humidity, is a "potentially lethal combination".

"Children, the elderly and people with underlying health conditions are particularly at risk," she said.

When will the heatwave end?
It will start cooling down at the weekend after Saturday's peak, but temperatures will stay above average across Europe well into next week.

How will it affect the UK?
By the weekend, temperatures are expected to peak at 31C (88F).

Highs of 30C (86F) could be seen for eastern parts as far north as Yorkshire, while temperatures will be in the upper 20s for festival-goers at Glastonbury on Saturday.

But it is unlikely to break records. Forecasts predict only a 30% chance of beating the highest temperature for June.

The warmer weather is expected to begin on Friday with highs of 27C (80.6F) - however some will experience a muggy start to the day.

How does it compare to last year's heatwave?

Last year's European heatwave came in July and maximum temperatures were below 40C (104F).

A period of unusually hot and dry weather contributed to wildfires in many parts of the continent during the spring and summer of 2018.

Northern and central European countries were hit with drought, with the west and the north of Austria being the worst affected.

The impact of the heatwave was severe, even in the countries considered rich and well prepared. Results included an increase in elderly mortality, shutdowns of nuclear power plants and a severe decline in yields.

The UK experienced its driest summer since modern records began from the start of June to mid-July. A heatwave was officially declared on 22 June and caused a widespread drought, hosepipe bans and wildfires.

The highest temperature reached was 35.3C (95.5F) in Faversham, Kent, on 26 July, according to the Met Office.

Are more heatwaves to come?
Heatwaves in Europe are becoming more frequent, according to scientists.

Stefan Rahmstorf, of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, said "monthly heat records all over the globe occur five times as often today as they would in a stable climate".
