Title: By the Book: Elliot Ackerman

The novelist and journalist, whose most recent book is the memoir “Places and Names,” thinks Vronsky gets a bad rap in “Anna Karenina”: “I believe that he loved Anna, in his strange broken way.”

What books are on your nightstand?

I’m a bit of an itinerant, so my reading material lives in my luggage. Rattling around there now are the following: Javier Marías’s “Berta Isla”; Catherine Lacey’s “The Answers”; two issues of Esquire (to include the one with the cover story by Jen Percy titled “An American Boy” that people got so worked up about); Florian Zeller’s “The Fascination of Evil”; and a copy of Sam Shepard’s “True West,” which my girlfriend, Lea, bought for me when we went to see the reboot with Ethan Hawke and Paul Dano.

What’s the last great book you read?

“Turbulence,” by David Szalay. He’s a damn good writer.

Are there any classic novels you only recently read for the first time?

“Bel Ami,” by Guy de Maupassant, which is a sendup of fin-de-siècle Paris. Its protagonist, Georges Duroy, is a confidence man, a social climber, who plays on the sympathies of both his lovers and friends to attain status and eventually a fortune as the eponymous Bel Ami. Reflecting on the novel’s significance decades later, Jean-Paul Sartre wrote of Duroy, “His rise testifies to the decline of a whole society.” I found it in the current affairs section of my bookshop.

What do you read when you’re working on a book? And what kind of reading do you avoid while writing?

What goes in comes out. So I try to read good books, to watch good films, to listen to good music.

What’s the most interesting thing you learned from a book recently?
Did you know West Virginia was the first state to celebrate Mother’s Day? Never knew that. I’ve been working with my son on his state project for school this week.

What moves you most in a work of literature?

These days there are no shortage of voices encouraging divisiveness, from the right, from the left, across international boundaries; the forces pitting us against one another are rampant, destructive, and they are challenging the very idea that every one of us shares a common humanity. When I write, I feel something as I put the story on the page. If a piece of art succeeds — whether it’s literature, film, painting, etc. — it causes the person experiencing that art also to feel something. How many times have you watched a movie and cried, or gone to a museum and felt overwhelmed? In that moment, you were feeling some fraction of what the artists felt as they made their work. I would call this emotional transference. Amid all our divisions — with voices putting up fences around our imaginations, telling us what we can write, what’s allowable to think, and who is allowed to say what — that type of emotional transference is a powerful way to assert our shared humanity. With so much cynicism out there, it is also an inherently optimistic act. That optimism is what moves me most in a work of literature.

Which genres do you especially enjoy reading? And which do you avoid?

As a genre, I avoid reading Twitter.

How do you like to read? Paper or electronic? One book at a time or simultaneously? Morning or night?

I enjoy the book as an object, so I do almost all of my reading the old way. Admittedly, I often buy a book solely for its cover. There’s nothing better than a beautifully written book with a great cover. I’ve got some mediocre books with great covers on my shelves, and some great books with mediocre covers. But the book that has both … that’s something special, isn’t it? That being said, I was on assignment last year for Smithsonian Magazine, driving through the South with the photographer Huger Foote, whose father, Shelby, wrote “The Civil War: A Narrative.” It is a classic, one of the most immersive reads out there, coming in at three one-thousand-page volumes, woof! Huger told me about a recent recording by Grover Gardner, a very talented narrator. For my New Year’s resolution, I committed to working my way through the audiobook, a first for me, and it’s amazingly done.

What books did you read while you were on active duty with the Marines?

When I showed up to my first platoon as a lieutenant I famously made everyone read “Starship Troopers,” by Robert A. Heinlein, which (as opposed to the movie) is an astute work of science fiction that deals with the role of violence in society and the obligations of citizenship. But god, everyone in the platoon hated me for it. (“We didn’t join the Marines to read, sir!”) Then, when we went to Iraq, I stopped forcing them to read and we all got along much better. My favorite reading while deployed — to be honest — was tabloids: US Weekly, People, Star. After several days out on patrol, the last thing you want to do is come back to your firebase and tuck into a chapter of “For Whom the Bell Tolls.” And I wasn’t the only one. You walked into most any firebase in Iraq or Afghanistan and you’d find a healthy stash of those types of magazines, and guys talking about Brangelina, or Kimye, or Bennifer, as a way not to talk about other things.

What are the best books you’ve read about military life?

The modern war novel, which was birthed in the trenches of World War I, has been often arrayed into the following moral arc: A naïve, idealistic youth goes to war; he witnesses the horrors and waste; he returns home haunted or even destroyed by what he’s seen; hence war is evil. Obviously, there are many variations on this theme — sardonic novels like “Catch-22,” or narratives that only obliquely reference war like “The Sun Also Rises” — but much of literature adheres to this basic framework and its moralism. And why shouldn’t it? War is pretty terrible. But counternarratives exist, ones that examine deeper complexities. “Storm of Steel,” by Ernst Jünger, an infantry officer who served in the trenches all four years of World War I, is one such book. Of the war, he wrote: “Hardened as scarcely another generation ever was in fire and flame, we could go into life as though from the anvil; into friendship, love, politics, professions, into all that destiny had in store. It is not every generation that is so favored.”

How do you organize your books?

I place them on shelves in no particular order. Sometimes I stack them under the bed.

What book might people be surprised to find on your shelves?

“Long Live Southbank,” which is a photographic history of British skateboarding. I grew up in London as a skater. They say once a Marine always a Marine, and that’s true. But once a skater always a skater has proved equally profound.

What’s the best book you’ve ever received as a gift?

It’s not exactly a book, but it is a literary gift. This past year one of my best friends clandestinely filled out an application for my induction into the Patrick Leigh Fermor Society as a birthday present. The prior director of the society then suddenly passed away, thus forestalling my application, which is still under review. We’ll hear soon, fingers crossed.

Who is your favorite fictional hero or heroine? Your favorite antihero or villain?

Alexei Vronsky in “Anna Karenina” gets a bad rap. His end in the novel is so sad, or at least is so sad to me. I believe that he loved Anna, in his strange broken way. After she throws herself under the train, we last see him on a train himself, headed back to his regiment, which he left in disgrace because of his affair with Anna. But we’re not sure if he’s rejoining them to chase after glory and redemption, or whether he’s on that train searching out his own death on the battlefield so that he might rejoin Anna. Tolstoy never tells us.

What kind of reader were you as a child? Which childhood books and authors stick with you most?

I loved stories as a child, reading less so. I was more into movies and television. On Saturdays, my father used to make me sit in my room and read for an hour. Once he had me reading “Ender’s Game,” by Orson Scott Card. To say I skimmed it would be generous. When I announced to him that I’d finished the book, he asked me what I thought of the ending. I told him I thought it was pretty good. (If you’ve never read that book, it has a spectacular plot twist at the end.) He sent me back to my room to finish it. Which I did. And which I count as one of the moments when I became a reader.

If you could require the president to read one book, what would it be?

“Service Etiquette, 5th Edition,” I think that’s the most recent one. When he’s done maybe he could pass it to his pals on both sides of the aisle in Congress.

You’re organizing a literary dinner party. Which three writers, dead or alive, do you invite?

Lea Carpenter would, of course, be there. So that leaves two. If you’d allow me one extra seat (I’m often that boor who brings an unannounced guest), I would like to invite Moses, Jesus and the Prophet Muhammad, that’s in addition to Lea. I bake from time to time and Lea does this amazing salmon in ginger, so we’d do a whole loaves and fishes motif in honor of J.C. Then we’d commence a small, nuevo-Nicene council and amend the sacred texts — Torah, Bible, and Quran — to include crystal clear language that killing in the name of religion was antithetical to all three of their teachings. Then Lea and I would cozy up with a good bottle of wine and listen to our three guests swap stories of miracles.

Disappointing, overrated, just not good: What book did you feel as if you were supposed to like, and didn’t? Do you remember the last book you put down without finishing?

It’s tough enough to get people to read anything. I feel like it’s bad karma to discourage someone from reading a book that they might otherwise be inclined to pick up and enjoy even if it wasn’t my favorite.

Whom would you want to write your life story?

Someone who owes me money. Or the ghost of William Manchester, can’t decide.

How do you decide what to read next? Is it reviews, word-of-mouth, books by friends, books for research? Does it depend on mood or do you plot in advance?

All of the above, though as previously mentioned an excellent cover might convince me.

What do you plan to read next?

Something from my luggage.

Author: New York Times
Date: June 13, 2019
Source: https://nyti.ms/2Kkjyyy