Irregular at Magic High School Anime's New Ads, More of Cast Unveiled
posted on 2014-02-09 02:35 UTC-8 by Egan Loo
Marina Inoue, Ryohei Kimura, Junichi Suwabe join show premiering April 4

The official website for the television anime of Tsutomu Satou's Mahoka Koko no Rettosei 
(The irregular at magic high school) light novel series unveiled a new commercial in two variants, 
more of the cast and staff, a new key visual, and premiere information on Sunday.

The first version of the new commercial features the ending theme song "Millenario" by ELISA, 
while the second version features the music by composer Taku Iwasaki.

The new cast members include:
Marina Inoue as Mari Watanabe
Ryohei Kimura as Hattori Gyobu
Junichi Suwabe as Katsuto Jumonji

The anime's story takes place in a world in which magic is not a fairy tale, but has existed for nearly one hundred years. 
In the spring, the Private Magic University Affiliated High School (Magic High School for short) is welcoming its new students, 
and names the top incoming student with the best grades the Bloom (read as "garland" in Japanese). 
The student called the Weed is the Bloom's replacement.

Siblings Tatsuya (Yuichi Nakamura) and Miyuki Shiba (Saori Hayami) are designated as the Weed and Bloom, respectively. 
Tatsuya is a young man who always has a farsighted expression, 
and Miyuki is a young woman who feels far more for her brother than sibling love. 
Since the day the two entered the gates of the elite school, the establishment's peaceful days have become chaotic.

Other cast members include:
Takuma Terashima as Leonhart Saijo (Leo)
Yumi Uchiyama as Erika Chiba
Satomi Satou as Mizuki Shibata
Atsushi Tamaru as Mikihiko Yoshida
Sora Amamiya as Honoka Mitsui
Yuiko Tatsumi as Shizuku Kitayama

The website announced last month that LiSA will contribute the opening theme song. 
Both LiSA and ELISA will sing at a March 23 stage event at the Anime Japan convention. 
Voice cast members Yuichi Nakamura, Saori Hayami, Sora Amamiya, and Yuiko Tatsumi will also appear.

Manabu Ono (Horizon in the Middle of Nowhere, Saki Episode of Side A) is directing the anime 
with assistant director Yuuji Kumazawa at the Studio Madhouse. 
Original novel illustrator Kana Ishida is also handling the anime character designs 
with sub-character designer Maho Yoshikawa. 
The chief animation directors are Ishida, Maho Yoshikawa, and Shinichi Miyamae, 
while the action animation directors are Takashi Tomioka and Satoshi Iwataki.

Jimmy Stone and Izmojuki (Izumojuki/Junji Okubo) are the CAD and mechanic designers. 
Rie Ota (Kusanagi) is the art director with art designers Yoshihiro Ishimoto, Yuho Taniuchi, 
and Akihiro Hirasawa. Yukie Noguchi is the color key artist.

Shuhei Yabuta is the 3D director, and Yuuki Kawashita is the director of photography. 
Kashiko Kimura is editing. 
Taku Iwasaki (Black Butler, Gurren Lagann, Soul Eater) is scoring the music 
with sound direction by Satoshi Motoyama and sound effects by Tomoji Furuya.

The light novels have 3.15 million copies in print, 
and ranked as the third top-selling light novel series in Japan last year.

The anime series will premiere in Japan on Tokyo MX TV and other stations April 4.

