Japan July-September GDP growth tops forecasts

 TOKYO  (Reuters) - Japan's economy grew faster than expected in the July-September quarter, data showed on Tuesday, boosting bond yields on expectations that the Bank of Japan is on track to raise interest rates by early next year. 

 The stock market benchmark rose more than 1.5 percent as the growth data cheered traders who were worried about a slowdown, but the government remained cautious on the economic outlook, pointing to sluggish consumption. Cabinet ministers also said they wanted the BOJ to support the economy through monetary policy -- a stance they have stated often in the past. Gross domestic product, the broadest measure of the economy, rose 0.5 percent in the three months to September, government data showed, beating market expectations of a 0.2 percent rise. On an annualized basis, the economy grew 2.0 percent in July-September, double the pace the market was expecting. It was the seventh straight quarter of expansion and also exceeded the 1.6 percent growth in the United States in the same quarter. "The data showed the economy continued to expand, moving toward steady growth, although the growth seemed to be led by foreign demand," said Yasuhiro Onakado, chief economist at Daiwa SB Investments. "The chance of a rate increase by the BOJ in January or February is large unless we get surprisingly poor data in production," he said. BOJ RATE HIKE The data surprised financial markets, which had feared the data could show a contraction in the economy. The Nikkei share average  .N225  rose 1.67 percent, its biggest one-day gain in six weeks, while the yen rose to around 117.40 yen  JPY=  per dollar from 118.05. Japanese bond yields soared, with the two-year yield briefly rising 9.5 basis points to a three-month high of 0.825 percent JP2YTN=JBTC, as investors grew nervous about the possibility the BOJ could raise rates as early as December. The central bank has said it will raise interest rates gradually in the future after hiking them in July for the first time in six years to 0.25 percent from zero. While the BOJ is expected to keep rates on hold at its policy meeting later this week, many investors think the bank could bump rates up in December or January. "I think the chances of a rate hike in December are getting high," said Kikuko Takeda, a market economist at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ. "Not only that, markets may start to think that the BOJ may raise rates once more after that next year." WEAK CONSUMPTION But Economics Minister Hiroko Ota said she wanted the BOJ to support the economy through monetary policy, echoing similar comments from Finance Minister Koji Omi. Some economists also said the GDP data may not be as strong as it first appears, because growth was propelled solely by exports and capital spending while domestic consumption was weak. Private consumption, which accounts for some 55 percent of Japan's GDP, declined 0.7 percent in the July-September quarter. Making up for the slump in consumption, capital expenditures grew 2.9 percent, well above the market consensus for a 0.7 percent rise. Exports grew 2.7 percent on the back of strong overseas demand, helped in part by a cheaper yen. Economics Minister Ota also raised the alarm about consumption, saying its sluggishness may not be due entirely to technical, one-off factors, such as bad weather in July. "The lack of rises in wages might be behind this," she said. "I'm watching consumption with concern. I don't think the economy will fall into a recession. But we need to be cautious over consumption and also on a possible inventory adjustment in the IT-related sector." At the moment, most economists do not see a sharp inventory adjustment in the high-tech sector. "There will be an inventory adjustment near the year-end, but there won't be a sharp drop in production," said Takumi Tsunoda, senior economist at Shinkin Central Bank Research. Tsunoda said sales of computers are likely to rise early next year after the release of Windows Vista, Microsoft's upgraded operating system, on January 30. Elsewhere, the GDP deflator -- a measure used to derive real GDP from nominal GDP by adjusting for price changes, fell 0.8 percent in July-September from the same quarter a year earlier. (Additional reporting by  Tetsushi Kajimoto ,  Yuzo Saeki ,  Yoko Nishikawa  and  Leika Kihara )