Two bids submitted for Clear Channel: sources


 NEW YORK  (Reuters) - Clear Channel Communications Inc. ( CCU.N ), the No. 1 U.S. radio company, was evaluating takeover proposals on Tuesday after two bids were submitted by separate private equity consortiums, sources familiar with the situation said. 

 Sources said that a bid by a consortium made up of Providence Equity Partners, Blackstone BG.UL and KKR KKR.UL was submitted on Monday. A second bid, from a consortium consisting of Bain Capital and Thomas H. Lee Partners THL.UL was also submitted on Monday, a separate source told Reuters. Texas Pacific Group, which had previously been involved in that consortium, was not part of the bid, the source said. Clear Channel was reviewing the bids at a board meeting on Tuesday, sources said. CNBC said earlier that an announcement could be made before the stock market opens on Wednesday, with bids at around the $36-a-share mark. That would value the company at about $18 billion. Clear Channel shares nudged 8 cents lower to $34.30 by lunchtime on the New York Stock Exchange. Clear Channel, which has about 1,150 stations, said last month that it was evaluating strategic alternatives for its business and had hired investment bank Goldman Sachs & Co. ( GS.N ) to advise it. KKR, Texas Pacific, Bain, Blackstone, Providence, Thomas H. Lee, Clear Channel and Goldman Sachs declined comment. A number of analysts have share price targets for Clear Channel in the mid-$30s and upward. Deutsche Bank, in a recent note, said its target of $36 took into account the possibility that Clear Channel would eventually accept a bid to go private. Bank of America analysts last month raised their fair-value range on the shares to $34-$40 from $34-$38, saying there were multiple strategic options the group could pursue, including taking the entire company private and spinning off its outdoor unit. Clear Channel has a majority ownership in outdoor advertising group Clear Channel Outdoor Holdings Inc. ( CCO.N ). Other interested parties have also been named by media reports. The Wall Street Journal reported on Thursday that two groups thought to be interested -- Apollo Management and Carlyle, and Cerberus Capital and Oak Hill Partners -- had largely faded out of the picture. Clear Channel, based in San Antonio, Texas, recently forecast strong fourth-quarter radio-advertising sales. It posted a 9.5 percent drop in third-quarter profit, reflecting the spinoff of its entertainment unit. Advertising-driven radio broadcasters such as Clear Channel have been challenged to develop new formats and technology in the face of growing competition from satellite radio, the Internet, and personal digital music players. Private equity firms typically buy companies with a small portion of their own cash and borrow the rest. They usually hold a business for three to five years, restructure it, then sell it, either to a buyer or on the open market in an initial public offering. In some cases, buyout firms "flip" an investment in a year or less when they think they can make a good profit.