Gas Prices Are Going Up. Here's How Much More You'll Pay This Year Based On Your Exact Car and Qatar Air CEO Says a Woman Could Never Do His Job

By DAVID JOHNSON 
June 12, 2018
Owners of Ford F-series trucks — the most popular vehicle in 2017 — will pay about $413 more in gas this year compared to last year, according to government estimates. Honda Civic and Toyota Camry drivers, meanwhile, will face increases of $206.
Those figures are based on the Energy Information Administration’s estimatethat gas will cost an average of $2.79 a gallon in 2018, up 37 cents from last year’s average. The calculation also assumes you’re doing as much driving as the average American — about 13,000 miles a year.
Gas prices jumped 1.7 percent in May alone, according to new data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, outpacing an increase of 0.2 percent across all consumer goods.
The rise is due to increasing demand and reduced oil production by OPEC member countries. Some also blame President Trump’s withdrawal from the Iran nuclear deal, through prices were already on the rise when he announced the move.
At $2.92 per gallon nationwide, gas currently costs more than the EIA’s year-long estimate. Prices tend to peak around Memorial Day, then dip for the rest of the year. Still, the current gas prices are at their highest point since 2014, when gas averaged $3.36 a gallon nationwide, amid instability in Iraq.
Enter your average mileage and your car’s make and model in our calculator above to find out how much more money you’re likely to spend on gas this year. You can also change the cost of gas by moving the red slider to see how bad it could get if gas gets more expensive. (Our results are based on advertised miles per gallon, or MPG; your actual results may vary depending on the condition of your vehicle, the kind of driving you most often do, and so on.)
Qatar Air CEO Says a Woman Could Never Do His Job



Group Chief Executive of Qatar Airways Akbar Al Baker walks with a model aircraft during a press conference on February 20, 2018 at the Airbus delivery center, in Colomiers southwestern France.
 
PASCAL PAVANI—AFP/Getty Images
By KATE SAMUELSON 
June 5, 2018
Akbar Al Baker, the chief executive of Qatar Airways, has come under fire for telling a press conference in Sydney, Australia, that only a man could do his job because it is so difficult.
When asked about what could be done to increase the poor representation of women in the Middle East’s aviation industry, Al Baker replied that Qatar Airways “has to be led by a man, because it is a very challenging position,” Bloomberg reports. His comments were reportedly met with load groans of disapproval.
After the press conference, which was connected to the International Air Transport Association (IATA)’s annual meeting, Al Baker clarified to Bloomberg Television’s Haidi Lun that he was “only referring to one individual” and “not referring to the staff in general.” He also claimed that there was no gender inequality at Qatar Airways and said the carrier’s staff is more than 33% female.
Al Baker’s comments came the day it was announced that he was commencing a one-year term as chairman of the IATA Board of Governors, succeeding Goh Choon Phong, the CEO of Singapore Airlines. He was named Qatar Airways’ Group chief executive in 1997.
According to the IATA Board of Governors’ website, of 30 members, just two are women: María José Hidalgo Gutiérrez, Chief Executive Officer of Air Europa, and Christine Ourmières-Widener, Chief Executive Officer of Flybe Limited. This is part of the reason why Bloomberg has described the IATA as a boys’ club.

