Bristol-Myers profit falls, hurt by generic Plavix

 NEW YORK  (Reuters) - Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. ( BMY.N ) on Thursday said third-quarter earnings plunged as sales of the anti-clotting drug Plavix were hurt by a cheaper generic, but the company raised its full-year profit outlook due to cost savings and lower taxes. 

 "Bristol's results were superficially better than expected and they did raise their guidance for the year, but the real issue is how well the company will do in 2007 and they didn't give any more clarity on that," said Deutsche Bank analyst Barbara Ryan. Some analysts expressed concern about future Plavix sales, upcoming fourth-quarter results and 2007 prospects. New York-based Bristol earned $338 million, or 17 cents per share, from continuing operations, compared with $964 million, or 49 cents per share, in the year-ago quarter. Excluding special items, the company earned 22 cents per share. Analysts, on average, expected 20 cents, according to Reuters Estimates. Quarterly sales fell 13 percent to $4.15 billion -- a bit shy of Wall Street forecasts of $4.18 billion -- as Plavix was mauled by competition from the early August introduction of the cheaper generic by privately held Canadian drug maker Apotex Inc. A deal between Bristol-Myers and Apotex to delay the generic for years fell apart and is now under criminal investigation by the U.S. government for possible antitrust violations. The probe has been widened to review whether the deal violated federal securities laws, Bristol-Myers said on Thursday. U.S. sales of Plavix plunged 43 percent to $474 million, but would have fallen far more if the generic had been available for the entire quarter. Bristol-Myers secured a federal court injunction on August 31 that prevents Apotex from selling any more of its product in the United States. But Plavix sales continue to suffer as huge supplies of the generic already delivered by Apotex remain on the market. "It is unclear how much inventory is in the hands of privately-held distributors," Merrill Lynch analyst David Risinger said in a research report. Bristol-Myers said, however, that it expects supplies of the generic to dry up in the first quarter. Meanwhile, it expects "some" sales of Plavix in the fourth quarter, but did not provide a forecast. Plavix, used to prevent blood clots that can trigger heart attacks, was the world's second-biggest medicine, with global annual sales of $6 billion before the generic arrived. Quarterly company results were helped by an 18 percent pullback in spending on advertising and product promotion, following the recent divestiture of the company's U.S. and Canadian consumer medicines business. The company boosted its full-year profit forecast to between $1.02 and $1.07 per share from its earlier prediction of no less than 95 cents per share. Even so, the new forecast represents a decline of at least 25 percent from last year's results. Global revenue from Plavix, which the company sells in partnership with Sanofi-Aventis ( SASY.PA ), fell 36 percent in the quarter to $630 million. Deutsche Bank's Ryan said Plavix sales, although battered, were better than she expected, and that sales of most other company medicines were in line with her forecasts. Global sales of hypertension drug Avapro, also sold with Sanofi-Aventis, rose 10 percent to $277 million. Revenue from schizophrenia treatment Abilify jumped 20 percent to $313 million. Reyataz, a once-daily protease inhibitor against HIV whose use expanded sharply outside the United States, rose 32 percent to $233 million. Sales of Erbitux, marketed in partnership with ImClone Systems Inc. IMCL.O for colon cancer and head and neck cancer, jumped 64 percent to $175 million. Shares of Bristol-Myers fell 3 cents to $24.63 on the New York Stock Exchange. (Additional reporting by  Kim Dixon  and  Lewis Krauskopf )