Suspect in Maleah Davis slaying denies his involvement in jailhouse interview: ‘I ain’t no killer, bro’
The Texas man held in connection with the slaying of 4-year-old Maleah Davis said in a jailhouse interview that he would "never do anything to hurt her."

Derion Vence had claimed that he, Maleah and his 2-year-old son were abducted on May 4 in the Houston area by men in a truck. He said he and his son were freed the next day and that the kidnappers kept Maleah.

Maleah’s remains were found last week near Hope, Arkansas and were identified on Monday. Vence had been arrested on May 11 for tampering with evidence, a human corpse, after investigators doubted his version of events.

A cause of death has not been determined. The Harris County DA’s Office said on Monday that “additional charges would be filed as the evidence supports doing so.”

Vence, the former fiancé of Maleah’s mother, denied his guilt to Chauncy Glover of TV station KTRK as he continues to be held in Harris County jail on $45,000 bond.

[More News] At least two dead after workplace shooting at California Ford dealership: reports »
“I ain’t no killer, bro,” Vence told the station. “Chauncy, I loved Maleah so much. I did for her more than her own parents. I never had a biological daughter. I would never do anything to hurt her. That’s not me. Ask anyone who knows me, and they’ll tell you I’m not that type of dude and I was good with the kids.”
He said that he should have been home with his family instead of spending his 27th birthday behind bars.

[More News] 47 dogs confiscated from Trenton home »
Quanell X, a community activist in Houston, said that Vence confessed to him that he had disposed of Maleah’s body where it was found.

Maleah’s mother, Brittany Bowens, had previously said that Vence abused Maleah.

“It’s not fair. It’s not fair at all. I just, I just don’t understand this. It’s not fair, because she didn’t deserve that,” she told KTRK.

With News Wire Services

Lakers pull out of Anthony Davis sweepstakes for now in stunner
American Airlines extends Boeing 737 MAX grounding through Sept. 3
President Trump's 'Coke habit' the cause of his mental and physical decline, says Omarosa
School district apologizes after valedictorian’s speech was cut off when she mentioned Tamir Rice, Travyon Martin
OJ Simpson sets record straight about those Khloe Kardashian rumors
A Texas school district apologized after a valedictorian’s speech was cut off by her principal at the mention of Trayvon Martin and Tamir Rice.

The Dallas Independent School District said in a statement that Valedictorian Rooha Haghar, of the Emmett J. Conrad High School, included remarks in her speech that were not approved by the administration.

“As a result, the principal made the decision to limit the student's remarks,” the statement, released Monday, read.

“In hindsight, we realize this decision may not have been reflective of the core values we teach our students, as we work to educate leaders of tomorrow. For that, we apologize.”