Shipping costs have hit a record high in the US
This story was delivered to Business Insider Intelligence Transportation & Logistics Briefing subscribers hours before it appeared on Business Insider. To be the first to know, please click here.

US companies logged a record $1.49 trillion in shipping costs last year, up 6.2% year-over-year, according to data from the Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals' annual State of Logistics report cited by The Wall Street Journal.
That's up a whopping $250 billion — or 19% — from what US companies spent on logistics in 2008. The estimates, which were not adjusted for inflation, encompass all types of shipping methods, including airfreight, railroad shipping, and last-mile parcel deliveries.

Shipping rates spiked significantly last fall, compounding existing pressure on the logistics industry. The higher rates were due to port shutdowns along the gulf coast and a mandate that semi-truck operators install new logging devices. Hurricanes Harvey and Maria swept through the gulf coast last fall, shutting down ports throughout the region for several months. Once reopened, the ports suffered significant delays as many shipped supplies to affected areas.

Meanwhile, a federal mandate that truckers install electronic logging devices in their vehicles to track the number of hours per day they're on the road was issued in December, further slowing down shipments. These delays led to a heightened demand that pushed up shipping rates.

Meanwhile, the trucking industry is dealing with a worsening labor shortage, which is driving up wages for logistics workers. The American Trucking Association estimated last fall that the industry was short about 55,000 drivers, and that's expected to grow 216% to reach 174,000 drivers in 2026. That helped fuel a 3.7% rise in wages for transportation and material moving workers — which includes all truck drivers and railroad workers — last quarter, a full percentage point higher than for all workers.

Autonomous vehicles promise to alleviate some of this pressure, but they won't arrive at scale for several years.General Mills told analysts on its Q4 2017 earnings call that its freight costs reached a 20-year high last year and ate into its profit margins. Walmart, meanwhile, recently relaxed shipping deadlines to give suppliers more flexibility to cope with delays resulting from suppliers' inability to find drivers.

The ever-worsening truck driver shortage will likely only drive up costs even further, a problem that'll be exacerbated by rising e-commerce volume — the report predicted that, in 2018, shipping costs will rise faster than the US GDP.

Autonomous cars and semi-trucks that'll arrive in the coming years will alleviate this pressure by speeding up delivery times and cutting costs by eliminating drivers. However, it'll be at least 5 years before they're operating at scale around the US.