Justice delayed, not denied: New York City reckons with the consequences of law enforcement gone awry
“What happened should not have happened. The actions taken by the NYPD were wrong, plain and simple,” Commissioner Jimmy O’Neill said Thursday, nearly 50 years after the uprising that followed the department’s degrading raid on the Stonewall Inn and less than 24 hours after Council Speaker Corey Johnson challenged him to finally apologize.
“The actions and the laws were discriminatory and oppressive, and for that, I apologize,” he said. “I vow to the LGBTQ community that this would never happen in the NYPD in 2019. We have, and we do, embrace all New Yorkers.”
As it happened, O’Neill gave his frank if overdue apology (The News in 2016 offered an apology of its own for its sneering, homophobic coverage at the time) on the same day that the badly overdue departmental trial for Daniel Pantaleo, the officer whose chokehold killed Eric Garner nearly five years ago, concluded.
Whatever verdict that administrative judge reaches for Pantaleo, who’s remained on the force on desk duty, the decision is finally up to the commissioner and his boss, the mayor, who have hidden behind a long delayed federal investigation to put off any accounting for a killing that shocked the city.
It feels like a moment of overdue reckoning here, as the district attorney’s race in Queens has been defined by calls for reforming that office and even transforming the role of a prosecutor, and as activists, prompted many years after the fact by a Netflix dramatization of the so-called Central Park Five’s wrongful convictions, are calling for the reopening of decades-old cases in Manhattan. 
(Notably, Patty Quillin, the wife of Netflix’s CEO, has been a big-money backer of Tiffany Cabán, a public defender surging in the Queens DA race.)
The danger is always that today’s corrections are tomorrow’s mistakes.
If police and prosecutors are to some measure a victim of their own success, as police violence and unjust convictions stand out more when there’s less overall crime and violence, that’s fundamentally a good thing.
Modern policing of the sort embraced by O’Neill and before him Bill Bratton — the commissioner pushed out of a more violent New York City by Mayor Rudy Giuliani after he was seen as taking too much of the credit for the drop in crime and who, returning under de Blasio to a far safer city, showed he could reform policing while keeping crime down — aspires, however imperfectly, to the nine principles supposedly laid out in the 19th century by Sir Robert Peele, including:
1) To prevent crime and disorder, as an alternative to their repression by military force and severity of legal punishment.
2) To recognize always that the power of the police to fulfill their functions and duties is dependent on public approval of their existence, actions and behavior, and on their ability to secure and maintain public respect. 
6) To use physical force only when the exercise of persuasion, advice and warning is found to be insufficient… and to use only the minimum degree of physical force which is necessary.
7) To maintain at all times a relationship with the public that gives reality to the historic tradition that the police are the public and that the public are the police, the police being only members of the public who are paid to give full-time attention to duties which are incumbent on every citizen in the interests of community welfare and existence.
And
9) To recognize always that the test of police efficiency is the absence of crime and disorder, and not the visible evidence of police action in dealing with them.
Reflecting on this now — who and what each of us is demanding protection from, the price of that protection and the need for uniformed, armed public servants to enforce it — rather than passively accepting the laws and orders that were already there is the way to avert apologies for “wrong actions, plain and simple” in the decades to come.
