Southern Baptist leader allegedly told woman her rape was a ‘good thing,’ according to lawsuit
A prominent Southern Baptist leader recently ousted as president of a Texas seminary over his handling of sexual harassment allegations is being sued by a woman who claims she was threatened and told it was “a good thing” she’d been raped after she reported the incident.
The former student at Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary, identified in court documents as “Jane Roe,” filed the suit against Dr. Paige Patterson back in March, though the documents were only unsealed just this week, the Houston Chronicle reported.
Roe in the lawsuit, which additionally names the seminary as a defendant, alleged Patterson dismissed claims that she was repeatedly stalked and raped at gunpoint in 2014 and 2015 by a male seminary employee and student — identified only as John Doe.
Despite her repeated rejections, Roe said he continued to relentlessly pursue her, according to documents. She said he would leave notes on her car, claiming he would hurt himself unless she agreed to date him.
“The more Roe resisted, the more Doe persisted,” the suit reads.
Doe’s “campaign of stalking, terror, manipulation and violence,” eventually escalated in 2014 to a rape at gunpoint, according to the complaint. He continued to repeatedly assault her in the following weeks and then vowed to kill himself if she reported the attacks.
Roe’s accused rapist let her be for a while after that — but in April 2015 he again attacked her inside a building he had access to as an employee of the seminary. According to court documents obtained by the Chronicle, he raped her two more times there.
Eventually, Roe confided in her mother about the attacks, prompting her family to reach out to Patterson in August of the same year.
The former student met with male personnel and Patterson, who allegedly asked her humiliating questions about the assaults, including whether or not her attacker had ejaculated.
After Roe said the incident made her feel like “damaged goods,” Patterson told her it was a “good thing” she’d been raped because her future husband should not care whether she was a virgin or not, according to the suit.
The alleged victim said Patterson “seemed to enjoy making Roe even more uncomfortable with his questions” and “callously rejected” requests for prayers or assistance with medical expenses.
Ahead of the meeting, Patterson allegedly sent an email to a seminary staff member saying “I have to break her down,” in reference to Roe.
According to the complaint, Patterson did report the assaults to law enforcement in August. Authorities found multiple firearms in Doe’s dorm, which resulted in his expulsion.
In another meeting with her family in September, Patterson accused Roe of lying about the assault and a stash of firearms in Doe’s room — even after they’d recovered the cache of weapons.
Roe withdrew from the school a week later. She said she was too scared to pursue charges against the attacker.
In her lawsuit, Roe said the seminary’s failure to educate students about dating and sexual violence stoked a “culture of hostility toward women and created conditions that substantially increased Roe’s chances of being assaulted.”
“Void of even the most basic standards of support for victims required by state and federal law, SWBTS had put in place a construct in which sexual harassment and violence were ignored — or at times — even celebrated by its leaders,” according to the court documents.
“Through intimidation and victim-blaming, any young woman who dared speak up was shamed into silence.”
Patterson, once a distinguished figure in the Southern Baptist Convention, was fired in May as president of the Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary for mishandling a sexual abuse allegation he received in 2003.
He was also removed as president of the Southern Baptist Convention last year also due to his handling of abuse claims. His ousters specifically pointed to the email in which he said he need to “break” Roe after she reported the ongoing sexual violence and harassment, the Star-Telegram reported.
Patterson in the lawsuit is accused of negligence, public disclosure of private facts and intentional infliction of emotional distress.
Roe is seeking an unspecified amount of damages.