Maho Tsukai Precure Staff, Characters, Story Briefly Listed (Update)
posted on 2015-12-26 02:45 UTC-8 by Karen Ressler

Toei Animation posted but later removed a press release detailing its newest 
Precure (Pretty Cure) anime series, Maho Tsukai Precure! 
(Maho Girls Precure!, or "Magic User Precure") on Saturday. 
The series is slated to premiere on February 7, 2016.
Isao Murayama (Majin Bone, Precure All-Stars DX3 Mirai ni Todoke! Sekai o Tsunagu Niji-Iro no Hana) 
is handling series composition and 
Masato Mitsuka (episode director for Smile Precure!, Yes! Precure 5 GoGo!) is directing. 
Emiko Miyamoto (episode animation director for Fresh Pretty Cure, Yes! Precure 5 GoGo!) is designing the characters.

The main characters are:
Cure Miracle/Mirai Asahina, a 13-year-old girl who's going into her second year of middle school. 
She loves anything interesting and is interested in many things. 
When she becomes a Precure she starts attending "Magic School."
Cure Magical/Riko, a 13-year-old girl who attends "Magic School." 
Though she's great at studying, she's not very good at magic. 
However, she aims to be a wonderful magic user one day. 
She meets Mirai in the human world while searching for the powerful "Link Stone Emerald."
Mofurun, a stuffed animal that Mirai received from her grandmother as a child. 
Mofurun is very precious to Mirai, so she brings Mofurun with her everywhere. 
When Mirai and Riko become Precure, Mofurun gains the ability to talk and sense magical power. 
Mofurun ends sentences with "-mofu."

The story begins during the spring break before Mirai's second year of middle school, 
when Mirai witnesses a mysterious object fall in to the park. 
Excitedly, she brings her stuffed bear Mofurun with her to see what it was. 
When she gets there she sees a girl named Riko flying on a broom. 
Mirai has a lot of questions, and Riko explains that she's searching for something. 
The two of them are wearing similar pendants.

Then Batti, an ally of the dark magic user Dokurokushi, appears before them and 
demands the "Link Stone Emerald." 
Batti creates a monster called a "Yokobaru" and drives them into a corner. 
Mirai, Riko, and Mofurun join hands and speak the magic words "Cure-Up Rapapa!," 
their pendants glow, and they become the legendary Precure.

The currently-airing Precure (Pretty Cure) series, 
Go! Princess Precure premiered in February. 
The Eiga Go! Princess Precure Go! Go!! Goka 3-bon Date!!! 
film opened in Japan on October 31. 
The Eiga Precure All Stars Minna de Utau? Kiseki no Maho! (Precure All Stars The Movie: Everyone Sing? Miraculous Magic!) 
film will open on March 19, 2016.

The 2012-2013 Precure anime series Smile Precure! is being localized in English as Glitter Force, 
and the first 20 episodes debuted on Netflix on December 18.
