
Quick Reminder - Reel Anime 2012 Starts Today
posted on 2012-09-13 06:00 UTC-8 by Jon Hayward
Madman Entertainment's program of four anime films launch theatrically across the country today;

Madman's Reel Anime 2012 program includes Children Who Chase Lost Voices, Wolf Children, 
From Up On Poppy Hill and Berserk - The Egg of the King at the following 
locations around Australia, with Perth's Luna Leederville cinema launching the 
films today instead of the previously planned September 16th.
You can now view the entire list of screening times through the Reel Animewebsite.
•	September 13 – 26
o	Sydney - Dendy Newtown.
o	Canberra - Dendy Canberra.
o	Avoca Beach: NSW - Avoca Beach Picture Theatre.
o	Brisbane - Dendy Portside.
o	Melbourne - Cinema Nova.
o	Adelaide - Palace Nova Eastend Cinemas.
o	Hobart - State Cinema Hobart.
o	Perth - Luna Leederville.

Information on each film below:

Children Who Chase Lost Voices
Children Who Chase Lost Voices (Hoshi o Ou Kodomo) is the latest film from 
Makoto Shinkai (Voices of a Distant Star, The Place Promised in Our Early Days 
and 5 Centimeters Per Second) and the film follows Asuna, a young girl who 
spends her lonely days listening to mysterious music emanating from a crystal radio, 
a keepsake from her recently departed father. She soon ends up on a journey of 
discovery to find a mysterious boy she just met. 
Takayo Nishimura (5 Centimeters Per Second, Before Green Gables) 
designed the characters and oversaw the animation process. 
Takumi Tanji (5 Centimeters Per Second, The Place Promised in Our Early Days) 
directed the art, and musical composer Tenmon (5 Centimeters Per Second, 
The Place Promised in Our Early Days, Voices of a Distant Star) collaborated 
with Shinkai again on this project.

Wolf Children
Wolf Children (Okami Kodomo no Ame to Yuki) tells the story of a 19 year-old 
college student named Hana who falls in "fairy tale-like" love with a "wolf man." 
After marrying the wolf man, Hana gives birth to two Wolf Children, older sister Y
uki ("snow") who was born on a snowy day and younger brother Ame ("rain") 
who was born on a rainy day, but when Hana's husband suddenly dies she decides 
to move to a rural town. The film is produced by a new studio "Studio Chizu" 
established by Mamoru Hosoda (director of The Girl Who Leapt Through Time and Summer Wars) 
specifically for the production of the film. 
The film is also co-produced by Studio Madhouse. 
Hosoda is credited as the creator, screenwriter and director with 
Yoshiyuki Sadamoto (character designer on Neon Genesis Evangelion, 
The Girl Who Leapt Through Time, FLCL, Summer Wars) handling the character design.

From Up On Poppy Hill
From Up On Poppy Hill is a Studio Ghibli film based on a 1960's 
shojo manga of the same name by Tetsuo Sayama and Chizuru Takahashi. 
The film follows a group of teens as the come together to save their school's 
clubhouse from destruction in preparation for the 1964 Tokyo Olympics. 
Hayao Miyazaki wrote the screenplay adaptation and the film was directed by Goro Miyazaki.

Berserk - The Egg of the King
Berserk: The Golden Age Arc - The Egg of the King (Berserk Ogon Jidai-Hen I: Hao no Tamago) 
is the first part of the trilogy and will adapt the "Golden Age" arc of the 
Berserk manga and details the youth of Guts, a highly skilled mercenary as he 
joins the army "Band of the Hawk" and befriends it's leader Griffith. 
The film is produced by Studio 4°C and stars Hiroaki Iwanaga 
(Tomica Hero Rescue Force, Moyashimon, Kamen Rider OOO) as Guts, 
Takahiro Sakurai (Toriko, Code Geass: Lelouch of the Rebellion, anohana) as Griffith, 
and Toa Yukinari (Grey's Anatomy dubbing, Naruto Shippuden) as Casca. 
Toshiyuki Kubooka (Batman: Gotham Knight episode 5) is directing the films 
and Ichiro Okouchi (Code Geass: Lelouch of the Rebellion) 
is handling the screenplay.
