Yankees tie MLB record after homering in 27th straight game
With runners on the corners and two outs down in the sixth inning, CC Sabathia had the Stadium on its feet Monday night. Clapping and cheering, they tried to will the 38-year-old former ace through the final out. He’d struggled through the first, but battled through to get two outs in the sixth and this crowd loved it. He struck out former Blue Jays right fielder Billy McKinney on the sixth pitch, an 81-mile-per-hour-slider, and the place erupted.
Across the field, a young Marcus Stroman watched closely.
The Blue Jays ace knows he is likely to be traded in the next five weeks. He made it clear before the Yankees 10-8 win over Toronto that he’d love to end up here at the Stadium. With an offense that is built to crush homers and score runs in buckets, the pitching could be the only thing that holds them back from winning their first World Series this decade.
Sabathia was gritty and determined Monday, but every one of the 104 pitches he threw was a reminder how fragile this Yankees rotation is. A misstep on his arthritic right knee and the Yankees are in deep trouble.
NEW YORK, NEW YORK - JUNE 24: CC Sabathia #52 of the New York Yankees pitches against the Toronto Blue Jays in the first inning at Yankee Stadium on June 24, 2019 in New York City. (Photo by Michael Owens/Getty Images) (Michael Owens/Getty)
Jonathan Holder, who has allowed 13 earned runs (including five home runs) over his last 5.1 innings pitched, gave up five runs, including a Freddy Galvis home run, without recording an out to let the Blue Jays back in the game. The right-hander, who was optioned to Triple-A after the game, has been a painful reminder that even a bullpen the Yankees invested heavily in this winter doesn’t have a strong long-man.
In other words, Monday was yet another example of why the Yankees need to get a guy like Stroman or Trevor Bauer or Madison Bumgarner or Matthew Boyd before next month’s trade deadline. They need the pitching to support this offense.
On a night that manager Aaron Boone rested sluggers Aaron Judge and Edwin Encarnacion, the Yankees chased off righty starter Aaron Sanchez after just 5.1 innings work, manufacturing seven earned runs on nine hits, including one home run.
DJ LeMahieu went 4-for-4 with a walk and two runs scored, his first four-hit game in pinstripes. He extended his hitting streak to 10 straight games.
Aaron Hicks hit a three-run home run in the fifth inning, which not only rallied the Yankees from a two-run hole, but tied a 17-year MLB record. They have hit home runs in 27 straight games, typing the 2002 Rangers’ record that was powered by Alex Rodriguez (16 homers) and Rafael Palmiero (10 homers).
Giancarlo Stanton’s two-run shot later in the inning was his first of the season, after missing 68 games with a left biceps, left shoulder and left calf injury.
The Yankees offense was never a concern, even when they were missing the majority of their sluggers on the injured list.
“It’s always right there under the surface. You just want to get the team back in the dugout as soon as possible, because these guys are capable of putting up runs,” Sabathia said of the lineup. “
But the Yankees need more pitchers to give those bats a chance.
Tuesday, the Yankees will use an opener for the sixth time this season. Luis Severino isn’t expected to begin his season until August because of shoulder and lat injuries. Domingo German is making his way back from a left hip flexor strain. James Paxton was already on the IL with a knee injury and J.A. Happ has allowed 20 home runs already this season.
[More Yankees] Mickey Callaway needs two press conferences to apologize for his temper tantrum »
Sabathia also had two stints on the IL this season because of the knee, but he’s grinding through before he retires at the end of the year.
Monday, Vladimir Guerrero Jr. and Rowdy Tellez each doubled in a run off him in the first. Then Sabathia shut the Blue Jays down for five innings. He gave up six hits — three in the first inning — struck out nine and walked two.
The crafty veteran chuckled self-deprecatingly about facing sons of guys he battled with over the last 19 years.
[More Yankees] Cameron Maybin is embracing new ‘hype man’ role for the Yanks while injured »
“I felt like Vlad Jr.’s got a little bit better eye, can cover the ball a little more,” Sabathia said. “When I am facing Cavan Biggio and Vlad Jr. it’s time for me to go home.”
Not quite yet. Sabathia returned for one last season, seeking one more chance at a World Series ring. Right now, he has the bats to make that run, but he and the Yankees’ pitching might need some help to get there.