BET Awards 2019: How Nipsey Hussle will be honored, who is performing and who is nominated
The memory of late hip-hop star Nipsey Hussle will take center stage at Sunday’s 2019 BET Awards.
One of the most anticipated moments of the ceremony will occur when the annual humanitarian award is posthumously given to Hussle, who was fatally shot in Los Angeles in late March at age 33.
The prestigious honor will commemorate the influence and philanthropic achievements of Hussle, whose real name was Ermias Asghedom.
"As a prolific artist and leader, Nipsey Hussle was zealous about driving change for the betterment of his community, empowering and employing those in need, and being an influential and highly respected leader,” BET exec Connie Orlando said in a statement this month.
“His passing was a tremendous loss to the entertainment industry and to the culture. We will continue to remember his advocacy and be inspired by the groundwork he set forth and his dire commitment to social change.”
[More Entertainment] Nipsey Hussle memorialized at 2019 BET Awards » How to watch the show:
The 19th annual edition of the award show kicks off at 8 p.m. ET and will air on BET and other networks within the Viacom broadcasting family, including MTV, VH1, BET Her, Logo, MTV2 and MTV Classics.
Where is it?
The BET Awards will take place at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles, where it has been hosted each of the past six years.
The famed venue has also been home to the Grammys, ESPYs and Emmys in recent years.
Who is hosting and presenting?
Fresh off her starring role in the latest “Shaft” movie, Regina Hall is set to emcee Sunday’s show as the night’s host.
 DJ Khaled, John Legend and YG are also slated to take part in a tribute to Hussle during the show.
Here’s everything you need to know ahead of Sunday night’s event.
Among the big-name presenters who will take the stage are Reverend Al Sharpton, Taraji P. Henson and Lena Waithe.
Who is performing?
The star-studded lineup of musical performers includes Cardi B, Lizzo, Meek Mill, DJ Khaled and Migos.
Lil Nas X ? known for his breakout hit “Old Town Road” ? and Billy Ray Cyrus, who is featured in that song’s remix, are also set to perform.
Who is nominated?
On the music side of the show, Travis Scott, Cardi B, Meek Mill, Ella Mai and The Carters (Beyoncé and JAY-Z) are nominated for album of the year.
Hussle is among the nominees for best male hip hop artist, a field that also includes Meek, Scott, Drake, J. Cole and 21 Savage.
Meanwhile, the best female hip hop artist category is made up of Cardi, Lizzo, Nicki Minaj, Remy Ma, Kash Doll and Megan Thee Stallion.
As for the acting awards, Hall is among the nominees for best actress, along with her “Little” co-star Issa Rae, Henson, Viola Davis, Tiffany Haddish and Regina King.
The finalists for best actor, meanwhile, are Denzel Washington, Chadwick Boseman, Michael B. Jordan, Mahershala Ali, Omari Hardwick and Anthony Anderson.
Who else is being honored?
Mary J. Blige will get the lifetime achievement award at Sunday’s show, while Chakabars will be honored with the global good award.

