New Code Vein Trailers Reveal Both Team Revenant's Bad Boy And Leader
More buddies, more problems.
Last updated by Jordan Ramée on July 13, 2018 at 4:39PM
Bandai Namco released two more character trailers for the company's upcoming action-RPG Code Vein. Whereas the first trailer focuses on Mia Karnstein, a young woman who fights to protect her younger brother, these two new ones offer backstory on the former mercenary Yakumo Shinonome and researcher Louis.
All three of these characters are Revenants, vampiric humans who gain power in exchange for lost memories and a bloodlust. Each acts as a possible "buddy" that travel with the player and assist with combat, while also offering their own quest line that influences Code Vein's overall story.
As the player slashes their war across the world of Vein, a cursed landscape that's collapsed beneath the Thorns of Judgment and been overrun by The Lost, they'll begin to unlock the secrets as to what happened to the Revenants' home and why it's been infested by monsters. To survive, players will need to rely on their buddies and master Code Vein's challenging stamina-based combat.
At first glance, Yakumo Shinonome seems to be a much more relaxed companion in comparison to Mia. However, his trailer quickly reveals that the man also has a troubling past. He can't remember the specifics, but he knows he had good friends and can't understand why he would have left them behind. His Hounds-type Blood Veil doesn't give him the same precision as Mia's Stinger-type, but when combined with his massive broadsword it seems to do more damage and have a wider area of effect.
Unlike the other two, Louis has no last name. His trailer also offers the least amount of backstory on his character. Despite his youth, Louis is the leader of the Revenants and he's searching for a cure to his and his fellow Revenants' growing bloodlust. Louis fights with the Ogre-style Blood Veil, which morphs his arm into a giant claw that looks straight out of Prototype.
Code Vein is scheduled to release on September 27 in Japan and worldwide on September 28. The game is launching on Xbox One, PS4, and PC.