Masahiro Tanaka will start Game 1 of London Series
The Yankees are shaking up their rotation for the two-game series against the Red Sox in London. They will go on turn with Masahiro Tanaka in the first game on Saturday, but would not announce a starter for the Sunday game.

We have Tanaka pitching that first game and then we're talking through some things about how we're going to set up with the off-days and stuff,” Yankees manager Aaron Boone said. “We're working through the mechanics of that and trying to take advantage of a few off-days.”

If the Yankees had stayed on turn, J.A. Happ would have started the second game. After allowing eight earned runs, including three homers, on Sunday, the Yankees have to be concerned about him pitching in the small confines of London Stadium.

The likely choice will be CC Sabathia. Sabathia is pitching on a right knee that will probably need a replacement after he retires at the end of the season. He has already needed two stints on the injured list because of the knee and has not pitched great so far this year.
The trip to London, with two days off before the UK series, and one day off on the way back, inserts an interesting wrinkle to an already grueling season. Boone said they will prepare the best that they can. Head trainer Steve Donohue will address the physical challenges.

“Stevie will get up and talk to the guys here and try and be proactive in making sure we’re hydrated and those things. Talking about sleep and when to try and get that sleep and what’s the best thing to do when we get there for guys, maybe not going to bed right away try and get some sleep on the flight there if possible,” Boone said. “We’ll try to be vigilant and understand what everyone is going through."

The Yankees do not plan to leave a pitcher behind to be ready for the Subway Series at CitiField on Tuesday. James Paxton is tentatively scheduled to start that one, but will make the trip across the Atlantic.

The Yankees and Red Sox can bring a 26th active player on the trip and two extras in case of an injury. Boone said they haven’t discussed who or what positions they will bring with them.

PROFESSIONAL COURTESY
Boone was hired to manage the Yankees weeks after the Mets hired Mickey Callaway. Neither had any experience managing at any level, but the two have had remarkably different experiences — in Boone’s first year he guided the Yanks to 100 wins while Callaway won 77. They have also had very different styles of handling the media.