Dow Chemical earnings rise on strong sales

 NEW YORK  (Reuters) - Chemical companies Dow Chemical Co. ( DOW.N ) and Lyondell Chemical Co. LYO.N on Thursday announced better-than-expected profits on strong demand and prices, sending their shares up. 

 Dow, the largest U.S. chemicals maker, and Lyondell benefited from strong commodity chemicals results, which offset higher costs for raw materials and energy that have hit the industry. However, both companies also reported large one-time charges that pared back net earnings significantly. Shares in Dow climbed 2.6 percent before easing back to $40.62 per share, up 1.2 percent, while Lyondell firmed 3.7 percent before slipping back to $27.11 per share, up 1.9 percent. Dow shares were also helped by the announcement that its board had approved a $2 billion share buyback program to begin once its current buyback plan ends, analysts said. Midland, Michigan,-based Dow said it benefited from an average 11 percent increase in selling prices for its products, which lifted margins despite an increase of nearly $750 million in raw materials and energy costs. However, analysts noted Dow's earnings gains were centered in base chemical operations rather than its performance plastics and chemicals operations, and that key products such at ethylene had shown price decreases recently. That could signal an earnings downturn. "I would actually categorize (the results) as disappointing," HSBC analyst Hassan Ahmed said. "It's shaping up to be a weak fourth quarter." CHARGES WEIGH Excluding special items, Dow posted earnings of 98 cents a share, beating the average analyst forecast of 91 cents a share, according to Reuters Estimates. Including $579 million in charges related to the shutdown of several of its plants, net income fell to $512 million, or 53 cents a share, from $801 million, or 82 cents a share, a year earlier. Revenue climbed 10 percent to $12.36 billion from $11.26 a year ago. Lyondell's net income totaled $57 million, or 22 cents a share, compared with $10 million, or 4 cents, a year earlier. Excluding charges that totaled 78 cents per share in the quarter, the company's earnings were $1 per share, beating analysts' average forecast of 93 cents a share, according to Reuters Estimates. Dow's basic plastics posted a 15 percent rise in sales from a year ago to $3.1 billion, lifting its earnings to $592 million. Basic chemicals sales climbed 13 percent to $1.5 billion in the quarter, but earnings of $122 million were hurt by a $165 million restructuring charge. Performance plastics took the biggest earnings hit, falling to $144 million from $582 million in the year-ago quarter as a $242 million restructuring charge took a toll, even though sales climbed 9 percent to $3.46 billion. Shares of Dow, whose products are used in everything from antifreeze to plastic pipes, have risen more than 20 percent since their late July low, outperforming a gain of about 5 percent for the Standard & Poor's Chemical index .GSPPM during the same period.