Thai cave rescue: Boys and coach not well enough to attempt escape
By Euan McKirdy and Kocha Olarn, CNN

Updated 1624 GMT (0024 HKT) July 5, 2018
Chiang Rai, Thailand (CNN)A medical assessment of the 12 boys and their football coach stuck in a cave in Northern Thailand has concluded that it is too dangerous to try to move the group out Thursday, according to a member of the Thai Navy SEALs who is not authorized to speak to the media. The SEALs have also started to pump oxygen into the chamber.

Separately, a new doctor's report highlighted that two of the boys and the coach were suffering with exhaustion from malnutrition.
Fresh details of the operation underway at the Tham Luang Nang Non to free the team were emerging on Thursday, as rescuers pushed ahead with multiple plans to extricate the group trapped underground for almost two weeks.
More rain is forecast this weekend, putting pressure on rescuers to formulate a plan to extract the boys before flood waters rise any higher.
New video shows boys in cave, wrapped in foil blankets 04:28
Huge volumes of water are being pumped out of the cave complex each day, but the narrow, winding passages inside are still flooded, meaning diving through the murky water is currently the only way in and out.
Rescuers entering the cave complex located in northern Thailand have to navigate dark, flooded tunnels for six hours to reach the team. It takes another five hours to return to the entrance.
An additional 30 SEALs arrived on site Thursday to reinforce rescue operations, according to Captain Supachai Thanasarnsakorn, deputy chief of the Thai Navy SEALs. They join the 80 already involved in the rescue operation comprising active, reserve and former SEALs.
Around the camp which has sprung up near the cave entrance, Thai military divers have set up an encampment with diving gear and equipment, while people from the local community hand out food to rescuers, other volunteers and the small army of press on site.
Why will it take so long to rescue the trapped Thai soccer team?