Crunchyroll to Stream Supernatural Anime Hamatora
posted on 2014-01-01 02:01 UTC-8 by Crystalyn Hodgkins
"Super-powered mystery x battle entertainment" project to premiere on January 7

Media distribution service Crunchyroll announced on Tuesday that it will stream the television anime of Hamatora, 
the "super-powered mystery x battle entertainment" mixed-media project. 
Crunchyroll will stream the series on Tuesdays starting on January 7 at 1:00 p.m. EST 
for premium members worldwide outside of Asia, the United Kingdom, and Ireland. 
Free members in the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, 
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden will be able to watch the new episodes one week later.

The show's main cast members include:

Ryota Ohsaka (Blood Lad) plays Nice, the independent-thinking partner in the "Hamatora" detective agency
Wataru Hatano (The Unlimited - HyobuKyosuke) plays Murasaki, Hamatora's empathetic partner
Emiri Kato (Pretty Rhythm Rainbow Live) plays Hajime, the amnesiac girl who eats a lot and often
Hiroshi Kamiya (Sayonara Zetsubo Sensei) plays Art, the cop who has known the Hamatora detectives from way back
Kiyono Yasuno (The Severing Crime Edge) plays Koneko, a broker for the Hamatora detective agency
Jun Fukuyama plays Birthday, the carefree handyman in Yokohama
Yuichi Nakamura plays Ratio, the doctor who helps out in the business
Eri Kitamura plays Honey, the brilliant scientist
Katsuki Murase plays Three, the kind "beast" who protects Honey 
Atsushi Ono plays Master, the owner of the Cafe Nowhere where the Hamatora agency meets
Yousuke Akimoto plays Gasuke, a cop and Art's subordinate
Takuya Eguchi plays Mao, an underworld information broker who lives in Chinatown
Nobuhiko Okamoto plays Seo, a high school student who takes a certain case to Hamatora
Ayaka Ohashi plays Rei, a high school student and Seo's childhood friend

Partners Nice and Murasaki form a detective agency called "Hamatora" in Yokohama in 2014 — but their "office" is a table at Cafe Nowhere 
where they and their friends wait for clients. 
An old acquaintance of theirs, a cop named Art, hires them for a serial murder case he is investigating, 
and they discover that the murder victims are all "Minimum Holders" — those who possess special hereditary powers discovered only in an extremely limited number of humans. 
As Minimum Holders themselves, Nice and Murasaki are drawn into this case, whether they like it or not.
The project is a collaboration between chief director Seiji Kishi (Danganronpa, Persona 4 The Animation, Angel Beats!), 
project composition writer Yukinori Kitajima (428 ~Fusa Sareta Shibuya de~, Senran Kagura, Professor Layton vs. Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney) 
and original character designer Yuki Kodama (Blood Lad manga). 
Touko Machida (The IDOLM@STER) and Jun Kumagai (Persona 4 scripts) are in charge of the anime series scripts, 
while Fantasista Utamaro is in charge of color art direction. 
Makoto Yoshimori (Durarara!!) is scoring the music at DIVE II Entertainment. 
Yu Wazu is adapting Kodama's designs at the relatively new anime studio NAZ (Take Your Way, assistance on Danganronpa and Devil Survivor 2). 
Hiroshi Kimura (HaitaiNanafa, Recorder and Randsell) is directing. livetune featuring Yuki Ozaki (from Galileo Galilei) will perform the opening theme song "Flat."
The series will premiere on TV Tokyo on January 7 at 25:40 (effectively January 8 at 1:40 a.m.). 
In addition to the anime, Kitajima and Kodama launched the manga in the 51st issue of Shueisha's Young Jump magazine on November 21. 
A video game "and more" will then follow.
