Funimation to Stream Buddy Complex, No-Rin, Nobunagun Anime (Updated)
posted on 2014-01-07 04:57 UTC-8 by Crystalyn Hodgkins
Buddy Complex, Nobunagun streams start today

FUNimation Entertainment announced on Monday that it will stream the Buddy Complex, No-Rin, and Nobunagun anime series. 
Funimation will stream Buddy Complex on Mondays at 10:00 p.m. EST for Elite Video Subscribers starting today. 
The episodes will be available for free streaming a week later. 
The company will stream Nobunagun on Sundays at 10:00 a.m. EST, with the first episode to be available later today. 
Funimation will reveal the simulcast details for No-Rin at a later date.

Sunrise's robot television anime series Buddy Complex will revolve around the friendship and coming-of-age of two boys. 
It begins with Aoba Watase, a boy who goes to high school in Tokyo and lives a carefree daily life. 
On the morning of his school's opening ceremony after summer vacation, he goes to campus as usual, 
but he has a chance encounter with another boy. 
The other boy's name is Jyunyou Dio Weinberg. 
Their encounter will soon alter the fate of the world.

The main cast includes: Yoshitsugu Matsuoka as Watase Aoba, Saori Hayami as Yumi Hara Hina, 
Kouki Uchiyama as Jyunyou Dio Weinberg, Sho Hayami as Kuramitsu Gendo, Ayumi Fujimura as Lene Kleinbeck, 
Tomokazu Sugita as Lee Conrad, Hiroyuki Yoshino as Jarl Duran, Rina Satou as Elvira Hill, 
Kana Hanazawa as Nasu Mayuka, Marina Inoue as Anessa Rossetti, Toshiyuki Morikawa as Alfred Gallant, 
Takahiro Sakurai as Bizon Gerafil, Nobunaga Shimazaki as Tarjim Vasily, 
Mutsumi Tamura as Lasha Hakkarainen, Yumi Uchiyama as Margaret O'Keefe.

"Hajime Yatate," the collective pen name for the Sunrise animation staffers, is credited with the original story concept. 
Yasuhiro Tanabe (episode director on Battle Spirits: Brave, Horizon in the Middle of Nowhere) 
is directing the series off scripts supervised by the "BC Project." 
Tomoshige Inayoshi and Asako Inayoshi are serving as both character designers and animation directors. 
Kanta Suzuki, Hiroki Tokuda, Tomohiro Kawahara, and Hiroyuki Taiga are designing the mecha. 
Tatsuya Katou is composing the music. 
True is contributing the opening theme song "Unisonia," while ChouCho is performing the ending them "Ano Sorani Kaeru Mirai de."

The "traditional robot action" series premiered in Japan on January 5.

The anime adaptation of Shiratori Shirow and illustrator Kippu's No-Rin romantic comedy light novel series 
will star Shintaro Asanuma (Love Lab, Muromi-san) as Kosaku Hata, a student and idol otaku at Tamo Agricultural High School (Tamo Norin Koko, shortened to No-Rin). 
Yukari Tamura plays Ringo Kinoshita, a new transfer student who recently retired as the idol Yukatan.

Shin Oonuma (WATAMOTE, Fate/kaleid liner Prisma Illya, Dusk maiden of Amnesia) is directing the series at 
SILVER LINK(WATAMOTE, Fate/kaleid liner Prisma Illya, Dusk maiden of Amnesia). 
Michiko Yokote (Genshiken Second Season, Princess Tutu, xxxHOLiC) is in charge of series composition 
and Masahito Onoda(Student Council's Discretion Level 2) is adapting Kippu's original character designs.

The anime will premiere on January 10 in Japan.

Nobunagun, which is based on Masata Hisa's original "stylish action" manga, opens with high school girl Shio Ogura visiting Taiwan on school trip, 
when she is caught in a surprise attack by monsters called "Evolved Invaders." 
The military is useless against them, but in the middle of the chaos, the mysterious E-Gene Holder agents from the government organization DOGOO appear.

Thanks to technology, these agents wield weapons infused with the spirits of great historical figures. 
Gandhi is now a barrier, and Newton is a gravitational maneuver. 
When her friend is endangered, Shio awakens the ability to wield one such weapon — the great Japanese warlord Oda Nobunaga as a giant machine gun.

Nobuhiro Kondo (Sgt. Frog, SD Gundam Force) is directing the series at the studio Bridge (Devil Survivor 2 The Animation). 
Takeshi Furuta (Devil Survivor 2 The Animation, Love Live! episode director) will serve as assistant director, 
and Hiroshi Yamaguchi (Comic Party, Rosario + Vampire, To Heart) is in charge of series scripts. 
KAZZ T (Sailor Moon, Dancougar TV) and Hiromi Matsushita (Dancougar TV, Love Position - The Legend of Halley) are designing the characters. 
Kenichi Takase (Cho Soku Henkei Gyrozetter) and Hirofumi Nakata (First Squad - The Moment OfTruth character and set designs) are creating mechanical designs.

The anime premiered on Japan's Tokyo MX TV station on Sunday, and Crunchyroll is also streaming the series as it airs.

Update: Funimation has updated its blog post to change the spelling of Nobunagan to Nobunagun.
