Fortnite's Lightning Bolt Location Guide: Where To Search Floating Lightning Bolts (Season 5, Week 1 Challenges)
Here's how to complete one of this week's trickier Battle Pass challenges.
Season 5 of Fortnite: Battle Royale is officially underway, which means players now have a new set of challenges to complete and Battle Pass rewards to unlock. Epic has kicked off the first week of Season 5 with seven new tasks of varying difficulty. We've already detailed where to find the Risky Reels treasure map, and now we've put together a guide to help you complete the other challenge that might give you some trouble this week: searching seven floating Lightning Bolts.
Like other challenges that task you with tracking down certain items, the Lightning Bolts can be found in various parts of the island. They are easy to spot once you're in their general area, and you collect them simply by holding the use button, as you would to open a chest. The difference, however, is that the Lightning Bolts are hovering in the air, and you can't pick up them while skydiving or jumping; instead, you need to build a structure and climb up it in order to reach them, so it is imperative that you have enough materials to get them.
Gallery image 6
The Lightning Bolts are always located in the same areas, and there are more than seven scattered around the island, so it should be easy enough to complete the challenge once you know where to find them. You can also collect the seven you need across several matches, although any Lightning Bolts that you've picked up will no be available on the map. Here are seven areas where we've found Lightning Bolts:
West of Tomato Town, above a small hill
West of Wailing Woods, above a small hill
In the northwest most corner of Junk Junction
Lonely Lodge, directly west of the top floor of the tall tower
Above a house in the northwest corner of Salty Springs
Southeast of Shifty Shafts, just north of the bridge
Between two large mountains east/southeast of Haunted Hills
Once you've collected all seven and completed the challenge, you will earn five Battle Stars, which will go toward ranking up your Season 5 Battle Pass. Unlike previous seasons, all of the weekly challenges this time are divided up into two different categories: Free (available to all players) and Battle Pass (available only to those who have purchased the pass). You can find the full list of Week 1 challenges below.
Along with the new challenges, Battle Pass owners have a ton of new rewards to unlock in Fortnite, including new skins, cosmetics, emotes, contrails, harvesting tools, and more. You can see everything in our gallery of all the new Fortnite Season 5 Battle Pass rewards.Fortnite Season 5, Week 1 Challenges
Free
Deal damage with SMGs to opponents (500) -- 5 Battle Stars
Search a Supply Llama (1) -- 5 Battle Stars
Clinger, Stink Bomb, or Grenade Eliminations (3) -- 10 Battle Stars
Battle Pass
Search chests in Snobby Shores (7) -- 5 Battle Stars
Search floating Lightning Bolts (7) -- 5 Battle Stars
Follow the treasure map found in Risky Reels (1) -- 10 Battle Stars
Eliminate opponents in Retail Row (3) -- 10 Battle Stars