Former UConn Star Diana Taurasi Happy To Be Back In Connecticut
Every year when the WNBA schedule comes out Diana Taurasi marks her calendar for one game — Phoenix Mercury at Connecticut Sun. No other regular season game can offer her what this game does — nostalgia.

The WNBA star and former Husky is one of the greatest to have ever played, let alone one of the legends of UConn. She traces a large part of that success back to her time at Connecticut under the intense coaching of Geno Auriemma. Connecticut was a different world for the California native, but it was a world where she not only honed her skills, but built a home away from home. Now, each time Taurasi returns she plans visits with friends and coaches from that special time in her life.

“I love it, I really do,” Taurasi said. “I love coming back here. I get to see a lot of familiar faces. I get to see some friends I went to school with, and catch up with coach Auriemma and his family.”

Taurasi, who’s having another spectacular season, is still going strong after 14 years in the league. She’s scored 20 points or more in 12 games this season, and was named the WNBA Western Conference Player of the Month in June. She continues to add to her enormous amount of accolades, which include three WNBA championships, two WNBA Finals MVPs, four gold medals and the league’s scoring record.

She’s had constant success throughout her lengthy career, which she has no plans of ending in the immediate future, and part of that success and longevity she credits to Auriemma.

“It’s just not a secret, he has a formula to bring out the best in you,” Taurasi said. “He really has mastered the mental and the physical side of how to become a great basketball player. It’s almost broken down to a science and he’s got the formula and he shares it with everyone, but not everyone wants to hear it. When it comes from him it comes with a different meaning, with a different force, and it forces you to look in the mirror and really ask yourself if you want to go through that.”

“I love it, I really do. I love coming back here. I get to see a lot of familiar faces...
— Diana Taurasi
When Taurasi arrived at UConn she made the decision that she was going to go through whatever Auriemma threw her way, which resulted in unparalleled success for the program and her. She led UConn to three national titles and was named the NCAA Final Four Most Outstanding Player two times, as well as winning the Naismith Player of the Year award in back-to-back seasons.

While UConn helped her achieve her athletic dreams, it also helped her build relationships that she still has today. One of those relationships is with her former coach. The two keep in touch throughout the year, and each visit back to Connecticut for Taurasi always includes seeing the man who helped her propel herself into greatness.

Thursday night, Taurasi and Auriemma met up again, 14 years after she played her last game for UConn. With Auriemma no longer her coach, their relationship has evolved. They won’t be in a gym, Auriemma yelling instructions and Taurasi poking fun at him. This time, they’ll be on Auriemma’s boat floating along a river and catching up over dinner.

“I didn’t even know there was water in Connecticut,” Taurasi said in her typical joking fashion.

The relationship and venue may be different, but they are still the same — passionate people with a lot of humor.