Quick Reminder: Puella Magi Madoka Magica Movie: Rebellion Screenings This Weekend
posted on 2014-01-31 13:00 UTC-8 by Jon Hayward
Theatrical sessions of Puella Magi Madoka Magica movie: Rebellion are running around Australia and New Zealand on this Saturday (and Sunday in Melbourne). 
We have the times for Madman Entertainment's special Reel Anime event.

The screenings appear to have been well met by fans with Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane all putting on additional screenings. 
You can find tickets for the screenings in the following locations and times, and just in case you needed to 
know more about Madoka we've given a summary below:
•	Auckland - Academy Cinema at 6:00pm.
•	Brisbane - Dendy Portside at 4:45pm (2:30pm Sold Out)
•	Sydney - Dendy Newtown at 5:00pm (Three cinemas sessions at 2:30pm and the Dendy Lounge are sold out!)
•	Canberra - Dendy Canberra at 2.30pm
•	Melbourne - Cinema Nova
o	Saturday the 1st of February, at 10:45am (1:00pm Sold Out)
o	Sunday the Second of 2nd February, at 10:45am & 1:00pm
o	Saturday the 8th February at 1:00pm
o	Sunday the 9th February at 1:00pm
•	Hobart - State Cinema at 2:00pm
•	Adelaide - Palace Nova Eastend at 2:00pm
•	Perth - Luna Leederville at 2:00pm

Puella Magi Madoka Magica Movie: Rebellion
Following on from the end of Puella Magi Madoka Magica movie: Eternal (that covers the end of the tv series) 
Madoka rewrote the universe, sacrificing herself and her happy normal days to save all magical girls 
from the cruel fate that awaited them by wiping witches out of existence. 
However the despair still manifest into creatures known as nightmares and 
magical girl Homura Akemi continues to fight alone in the hope that she will be able to see Madoka smile again.

Akiyuki Shinbo and Yukihiro Miyamoto directed the third film at SHAFT with original character designs from manga creator Ume Aoki (Hidamari Sketch). 
Yuki Kajiura provided the music.

The main cast returned from the television series and previous two films, 
with Aoi Yuki as Madoka Kaname, Chiwa Saito as Homura Akemi, Eri Kitamura as Sayaka Miki, 
Kaori Mizuhashi as Mami Tomoe, Ai Nonaka as Kyoko Sakura, and Emiri Kato as Kyubey. 
Kana Asumi joined the cast as the new magical girl Nagisa Momoe. 
There is also a new enemy named Nightmare who is not a witch.

Aniplex producer Atsuhiro Iwakami was interviewed after the film debut in Japan and was asked if there is anything planned for the future of Madoka, 
Iwakami replied "The franchise is now at a blank page. Personally, I think if there is a chance for more…". 
This fits in with writer Gen Urobuchi's comments last year that SHAFT is considering a new TV series and more films after Rebellion.

The first two movies of Puella Magi Madoka Magica (Beginnings and Eternal) cover the majority of the TV series 
and were screened in Australia last year despite some technical difficulties. 
The first two films have not yet been released to home video by Madman Entertainment.

ANN recently attended the US premiere of Puella Magi Madoka Magica movie: Rebellion, 
producer Atsuhiro Iwakami and Studio SHAFT president Mitsutoshi Kubota were both in attendance and you can read what they had to say here.

Since release the third film has topped the Japanese box office on it's debut and 
has went on to earn over 1.9 billion yen (over 21 million dollars AUD) and 
been nominated for animated movie of the year by the Japan Academy Prize Association.
