Bulls to sign Jabari Parker to 2-year, $40 million deal
It’s official. Jabari Parker is coming home.

The former Simeon High star verbally agreed to sign a two-year, $40 million deal with the Bulls after the Bucks worked to rescind their qualifying offer past last night’s deadline. This gesture made Parker an unrestricted free agent and allowed the Bulls to negotiate with him without signing him to an offer sheet.

“Jabari and I felt it was in the best interest of both he and the team to rescind our qualifying offer, making him an unrestricted free agent,” Bucks general manager Jon Horst said in a statement. “We appreciate everything Jabari has brought to our team and our community over the last four years and we wish him well.”

The second year of Parker’s deal isn’t fully guaranteed, sources said. Essentially, it’s a team option, which gives the Bulls and Parker a season to prove he’s healthy after suffering two torn left ACLs in his first four seasons in the league.

If Parker plays well and stays healthy, there’s optimism from both sides to negotiate a long-term deal.

The Bucks originally had made Parker a restricted free agent by offering him his qualifying offer of $4.3 million. As of last night’s 11:59 p.m. deadline, the Bucks had yet to rescind that offer. But when it became clear that the Bucks wouldn’t match the Bulls if they signed him to an offer sheet, the Bucks worked with Parker’s agency to rescind the offer.

“Jabari and I express our sincere gratitude to Jon Horst and Bucks owners Marc Lasry, Wes Edens and Jamie Dinan for working side-by-side with us throughout the free agency period,” said Mark Bartelstein, CEO, Priority Sports & Entertainment in a statement. “From the moment the Bucks drafted Jabari with the No. 2 pick in the 2014 Draft, they have gone out of their way to treat Jabari as a member of the Bucks family, and this is another perfect example of doing exactly that, and we’re very appreciative.”

Parker also spoke in the statement released by the Bucks.

“I am extremely grateful to the Bucks and the incredible fans of Milwaukee for showing me so much love and encouragement,” Parker said. “Specifically, I’d like to thank Jon, Marc, Wes and Jamie for giving me my start in the NBA and supporting me throughout my career.

“Thank you to my teammates for being like brothers to me. Also, the medical and performance staff led by Troy Flanagan and Suki Hobson deserve my unending thanks for their dedication in helping me get stronger and healthier every day.”

The Bulls have a strong relationship with Parker’s agent, the Chicago-based Bartelstein. He and his agency also represent Bobby Portis and first-round pick Chandler Hutchison.

The Bulls were asked and didn't confirm or deny whether or not they had made a promise to Hutchison and his agency to select him at No. 22 in last month’s NBA draft after Hutchison pulled out of the NBA draft combine and didn’t work out for teams.

Parker, who led Simeon to four straight state championships, also has told people his preference would be to play for the Bulls, joining his hometown team with a young core of players. Parker, 23, has averaged 15.3 points over four seasons that also has featured him tearing his left ACL twice.