Mother accused of torturing her children, boiling their puppies and poisoning the family kitten
A mom accused of beating her children, forcing them to watch her boil their puppies alive and fatally poison the family cat is in trouble with New Mexico police.
Martha Crouch, seen wearing an oxygen tube in her mugshot, is charged with child abuse and extreme cruelty to animals, according to NBC News. Her husband, Timothy, is accused of obstructing justice.
Crouch reportedly got cops’ attention when one of her adult children, not named in the report, was charged with assault with a deadly weapon. One of Crouch’s daughters then told investigators of her mother’s alleged heinous acts of cruelty. Crouch and her husband are expected to be assigned public defenders.
The New Mexico Children, Youth and Families Department began looking into the Crouch household due to suspicion the children who lived there were being deprived an education, KOB 4 in Albuquerque reported.
[More News] At least two dead after workplace shooting at California Ford dealership: reports »
Timothy Crouch Jr., one of the couple’s 15 children, said the abuse claims are not true.
"My family are wonderful people,” he told KOB 4. “My mom and dad are some of the best people you’ll meet.”
However, according to that report, a teenager living in the home said she was frequently abused and that she and her siblings were fed one meal per day. One of the Crouch’s sons told cops he’d been “beaten, shot, stabbed and run over” by his parents and still has pellets in his arms to prove it.
Court records reportedly indicate the Crouchs have been targeted by complaints of a similar nature in Alaska, Kansas, Missouri and Montana.
A Florida mother was arrested on child neglect charges after police said they discovered her children were living in disturbing conditions.
Jessica Stevenson, of Milton, faces five felony counts of child abuse. She was taken into custody on May 3, two weeks after an elementary school worker filed a police report against her, alleging that her daughter had worn the same clothes to school for a week, according to court documents from the Santa Rosa County Sheriff’s Office obtained by CNN.
The school worker claimed that the girl didn’t know the last time she had taken a shower or bath, dirt “was caked into” her clothing and one piece “had caked fecal matter and urine soaked into” it, according to the news organization.
The employee also noted a previous incident in which “hundreds of bugs” crawled out of her backpack in the lunchroom.
Authorities then went to the girl’s house, where she lived with her mother and siblings who ranged in age from 5 to 14. Once inside, they observed that there was a cockroach infestation, as well as bleach within reach of Stevenson’s five children and rancid food in the fridge, according to WEAR.
[More News] At least two dead after workplace shooting at California Ford dealership: reports »
“The amount of neglect in this case is very disturbing,” Assistant State Attorney Greg Marcille said.
The Florida Department of Children and Families was once called to the home prior to the sheriff’s office investigation, however the agency decided against removing the children.
Stevenson faces one felony count for each of her children. She is currently out on bond.
[More News] 47 dogs confiscated from Trenton home »
In an interview following her release, Stevenson told WEAR that she never neglected or abused her children.
“I'm not a bad mom, I do everything I can. I work hard,” Stevenson told the outlet.
She said she is not allowed to contact her children.
[More News] Mother accused of torturing her children, boiling their puppies and poisoning the family kitten »
“It's not easy when you're one person and five kids. I want to do better and I'm trying,” Stevenson added.
Her next court appearance is scheduled for May 30 at the Santa Rosa County Courthouse, according to CNN.