The best LGBT-friendly hotels
#Travel
(CNN) — When you travel, few things offer more comfort than a friendly place to lay your head.
For lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender travelers, a welcoming place to stay is perhaps the single-most important element of planning a trip.
After all, nobody wants to plan a relaxing vacation only to have their bliss diminished by feeling unwelcome or unsafe.
So with both Pride and summer-travel seasons ahead, we've rounded up this list of the world's top LGBT-friendly accommodations (or cities) around the world.
This roster focuses on gay and lesbian-owned properties, hotels with out team members, major LGBT destinations and hotel brands that expressly support the LGBT community.
With every diverse traveler, the world grows a little bit more tolerant, more empathetic and more welcoming.
New York City
The world's original melting-pot city is rich in LGBT culture.
In 2019, NYC will mark a half century since the Stonewall uprising—the six-day-long riot that galvanized the gay civil-rights movement. About three million travelers are expected to visit the city for June's Stonewall50 and WorldPride (making its U.S. debut).
The good news is that most hotels in all five boroughs welcome all travelers and serve as reliably comfortable, safe places for gay guests. So visitors bound for NYC can plan for lodging based on their own priorities, be it budget, location or style.
But for those who wish only to perch in prime gay neighborhoods, aim for Greenwich Village, Chelsea, Hell's Kitchen, the East Village; Brooklyn's Williamsburg, Bushwick or Park Slope; or Queens's Jackson Heights.
San Francisco
The history of the gay rights movement runs deep in San Francisco, the city that many LGBT travelers consider an essential destination.
Its first gay bar opened in 1908 (although it didn't stay open for long, the precedent was set), its first lesbian organization started in 1955, and Life Magazine called it the "gay capital of America" back in 1964.
Today, lodging in an welcoming hotel or B&B is as easy as booking a reservation virtually anywhere across San Fran.
But travelers looking to immerse themselves in the city's go-to "gayborhoods" should aim for lodging in The Castro, Mission Dolores, Tenderloin, SOMA or Bernal Heights.
Los Angeles
The City of Angels' LGBT history began with some of the world's first gay protests, back in the 1950s. Today, downtown L.A., Silver Lake and even Long Beach (on the city's southern edge) are home to gay-owned businesses and clubs and year-round events.
But West Hollywood remains the city's top LGBT destination -- and technically a city unto itself, with its own mayor and city council. Its two square miles comprise arguably the gayest city in America, hosting L.A. Pride in early June.
LGBT travelers can expect to find boutique hotels like The Chamberlain, friendly chains like the Best Western Plus Sunset Plaza Hotel and luxury scenes like The Mondrian to deliver sunny hospitality to an array of guests.