What is considered the greatest mistake in the history of physics?

I suggest these criteria for the seriousness of mistakes in physics .

The mistake held back the progress of science on a major issue for a long time: a lifetime or a century.
The mistake stole part or all of the active scientific life of one or more excellent scientists.
The mistake was made deliberately by people who knew it was bad science, to protect their careers, suppress competitors, or to gain career advancement or money.
A substantial portion of the scientific community promoted the mistake or suppressed the truth for a number of years.
The mistake caused substantial damage to society in terms of scientific progress, health, morality, prosperity.
I conjecture that many of the most serious mistakes are not known widely or by anyone, because neglect and/or suppression have been effective. Perhaps some historians of science know more about such cases than the rest of us.

Here a a few candidates that come to mind,

Suppression of information about the health risks of tobacco. Two very accomplished physicists, Fred Seitz and Fred Singer, were leaders of the suppression campaign led by tobacco companies for about 10-20 years. They did this knowing that their position was false. It appears that one of their prime motivations was the belief that the evolutionarily superior people were running big companies and making a lot of money. Protecting the interests of these superior humans was more important than stopping the loss of life. Peak mortality from lung cancer was 159,000 in 2005. If we assume that every year the suppression or deliberate obscuration of information caused 25% of the deaths, and the obstruction lasted for 20 years, then this caused about 800,000 early and preventable deaths. This case is thoroughly presented in the book “Merchants of Doubt”, by Naomi Oreskes and Erik Conway, 2015.
Resistance to plate tectonics. In 1912–1929, Alfred Wegener, a German geophysicist, wrote various versions of his theory of plate tectonics. Some of his most compelling evidence was that the continental shelves fit together extremely well, and the geology of the regions that fit together was very similar (for example New England and northern Britain). The main objection to the theory was that no one could imagine an energy source inside the earth that came close to being able to move the earth’s crust in these ways. The geology community failed in two respects: the unwillingness to give Wegener’s suggestion the credibility it warranted (which slowed down exploration of the evidence), and treatment of Wegener with disrespect in parts of the scientific community. Wegener never attained recognition for his contribution. He died on an expedition in Greenland in 1930. In the 1950s, exploration of the sea floor revealed the large amount of rearrangement of the rocks, and the way the magnetic fields frozen into the rocks did not fit unless there was large scale movements of the earth’s crust.
The heliocentric theory of the solar system was suppressed for more than a century by the Catholic Church. They tried Galileo Galilei for heresy, and probably threatened him with torture on the rack to get him to recant his theory. He was sentenced to house arrest for the last 7 years of his life. Galileo warned the Church that suppression of scientific ideas would snuff out science in the southern Catholic parts of Europe, and would cause the centers of innovation to move north. The cost to Southern Europe was enormous and is still evident. This case does not involve a mistake by the physics community, but a mistake by powerful institutions that suppressed scientific advances. In 1992, 350 years after the death of Galileo, the Catholic Church issued an apology to Galileo. The bright side of this episode is that the Catholic Church has historical memory and enough honesty to admit this serious mistake 360 years later, whereas many evangelical groups continue to teach that the earth is about 4,000 years old, and that biological evolution is a heresy promoted by evil forces.