Crunchyroll to Stream 2nd Silver Spoon Season, Z/X Ignition
posted on 2014-01-05 09:53 UTC-8 by Egan Loo
Also confirms streaming of Wake Up, Girls! film & TV series, live-action Mischievous Kiss - Love in Tokyo

Media service Crunchyroll announced during its Otakon Vegas panel on Saturday that it will stream 
the second season of the Silver Spoon anime and the Z/X Ignition television anime. 
Both will start streaming on January 9. 
Crunchyroll also confirmed that it will stream both the film and television series for the Wake Up, Girls! anime project. 
On Friday, the service announced that it will stream the live-action series Mischievous Kiss - Love in Tokyo (Itazurana Kiss ~Love in Tokyo).

Otomi Deai, assistant director for the first season based on Hiromu Arakawa's agricultural school manga Silver Spoon, 
is taking over for Tomohiko Ito to direct the second season. 
TakuKishimoto is again writing the scripts, and Shusei Murai is also returning to handle the music. 
A-1 Pictures is again producing the series, and Ito will instead work as sound director. 
Japanese band Fujifabric is performing the opening theme song Life," and Goose House is performing the ending theme "Oto no NaruHo e."

The second season will premiere on Fuji TV's Noitamina programming block on January 9. 
Crunchyroll will begin streaming the anime that day at 12:50 p.m. ET in the United States of America, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, 
the United Kingdom, Ireland, South Africa, Central/South America, Spain, Portugal, and Turkey.

The story of Z/X Ignition is set in the not-so-distant future. 
Five "Black Points" suddenly appeared around the world as portals to parallel worlds. 
Immediately after, strange creatures began their invasion from these portals. 
These creatures are the inhabitants of five worlds — the same worlds in different timeframes. 
In order to ensure their own future timeframe survives, each of the five invasion forces battle to wipe the other future timeframes out. 
The key is one card-shaped device.

The anime adapts Nippon Ichi Software's trading card game Z/X Zillions of enemy X (ZX is pronounced as Zex). 
The game advertises itself as the "first free" trading card game system since a free deck is offered at meets held by card shops and events. 
A PDF file is even posted online so people can print them out themselves. 
The card game has also been adapted into a PlayStation 3 game and a manga series.

Crunchyroll will begin streaming Z/X Ignition on January 9 at 1:50 p.m. ET in the United States of America, Canada, 
South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Central America, South America, French speaking Europe, United Kingdom, Ireland, 
German speaking Europe, Sweden, Norway, Finland, and Denmark.

Animate.tv reported last week that Crunchyroll would stream the Wake Up, Girls! film and television anime. 
The film will begin streaming at 12:00 p.m. ET on January 10 to the United States, Canada, 
Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. 
The weekly series will then follow at 1:30 p.m. ET that same day.

Crunchyroll began streaming the first two episodes of Mischievous Kiss - Love in Tokyo on Friday, 
and it will add two to three more episodes every Wednesday at 5:00 pm ET. 
DramaFever and Hulu streamed this newest adaptation of Kaoru Tada's classic unfinished shojo manga as it aired in Japan last year.
