Javier Baez's rock star performance moves Cubs into first place
Javier Baez is only 25, so it was understandable that he confessed to not knowing of the Beatles — the beloved band that broke up nearly 50 years ago.

But Baez smiled when he learned that Cubs manager Joe Maddon believes the popularity of his second baseman is swelling to rock star status.

“That means I’m doing something good,” Baez said after manufacturing the Cubs’ winning run in the 10th inning Friday night without hitting the ball out of the infield.

Baez reached on an infield hit, stole second base, advanced to third on a throwing error by Padres catcher Austin Hedges, kept running when center fielder Manuel Margot bobbled the ball and scored the deciding run in the 10th inning in a 5-4 victory over the Padres.

“If he grew his hair, (Baez) would look like George (Harrison),” Maddon quipped when asked to compare what Beatles member Baez might resemble.

“It’s a really good time for him as a young baseball player, and it’s a good time for us.”

The victory moved the Cubs (53-38) ahead of the Brewers (55-40) by percentage points for first place in the National League Central.

With each win, Baez continues to enhance his All-Star status. Prior to his latest theatrics, Baez hit an opposite-field double to right, advanced to third on a wild pitch and scored on a two-run single by Ian Happ in the second.

And in the first, Baez made a diving stop and backhanded flip behind second to rob Eric Hosmer of a two-run single and limit the damage to one run in the first.

“I try to stay out of his way,” Maddon said.

Anthony Rizzo didn’t mind getting upstaged by Baez’s heroics, even after Rizzo tied the game with a two-out RBI double off closer Brad Hand with two out in the ninth.

“At this point, it’s not even surprising to us,” Rizzo said after collecting three hits from the leadoff spot. “And it’s crazy to say that.

“His baseball instincts are taking over the whole game, and people are noticing it more than ever and it’s fun because that’s who he is and he continues to keep getting better.

“He’s a game-changer — offensively, defensively and on the bases. He does it all.”

Meanwhile, two of Rizzo’s three hits came against left-handers Clayton Richard and Hand.

“There’s no trying to do extra against those guys,” Rizzo said.

Maddon concurred with Rizzo’s strategy.

“He was not trying to pull the ball,” Maddon said. “That was the secret.”

When asked if Rizzo would bat Saturday night in the leadoff spot, Maddon replied, “Book it.”

mgonzales@chicagotribune.com

Twitter @MDGonzales