Mickey Callaway needs two press conferences to apologize for his temper tantrum
PHILADELPHIA – Instead of turning the page from the worst day the Mets have endured in decades, Mickey Callaway and Jason Vargas made an embarrassing debacle more pathetic than it initially was, and more difficult than it ever had to be.

Callaway cursed out Mets beat writer Tim Healey of Newsday following a bad loss on Sunday. In the tiny Wrigley Field clubhouse, Healey said, “See you tomorrow, Mickey.” The manager called Healey “motherf---er” multiple times and asked him to leave the clubhouse. Then, Vargas took steps toward Healey threatening a fight before the two were separated by a handful of people.

‘I’ll knock you the f--k out, bro!’: Mickey Callaway and Jason Vargas in screaming clubhouse altercation with reporter »
In his first public statement since the outburst, Callaway was cocky, uncontrite and failed to apologize to Healey, the team or the fans despite his many opportunities to do so. Callaway was asked point blank if he is sorry, to which the manager replied, “Like I said, I can control my reactions better, absolutely.” Callaway said the incident showed that he is a tough competitor and passionate about the game.

The Mets released a statement Sunday evening explaining the organization does “not condone this type of behavior” from an employee. For these unruly altercations, the Mets fined both Callaway and Vargas in what the organization deemed the appropriate amount of discipline. General manager Brodie Van Wagenen said Callaway’s embarrassing outburst has not changed his faith in the manager.

“My confidence remains the same that Mickey is capable of doing this job and we will support him in doing so," Van Wagenen said.

Callaway was asked if he can keep his emotions in check for the rest of the season and ensure that an outburst like the one from Sunday will not happen again. The manager did not assure the situation won’t happen again, and instead, provided a stranger comparison.

"Billy Martin punched a reporter one time. It's just part of this game,” Callaway said. “I'm a passionate guy about baseball and I'm a tough competitor. The thing is, you guys don't need to see it directed towards you guys. You guys have a job to do, I've always understood that.”
Vargas did not take questions from reporters. Instead, the Mets pitcher spoke briefly for 30 seconds and, following in his manager’s footsteps, did not publicly apologize for his threat to Healey or hold himself accountable.

"I think it's unfortunate for all parties, an unfortunate distraction,” Vargas said. “But tonight we got the Phillies to play. The team addressed the situation. The organization made a statement and that's really all there is to it.”

In extremely atypical fashion, Callaway called for another media presser just one hour before first pitch. Sandwiched between both media scrums was the public reaction to Callaway’s initial unapologetic comments. In the second public announcement, Callaway apologized for his actions in a rushed tone while feigning sorrow. He did not take questions after his second statement.

“I understand that — I got some feedback that — in my meeting with Tim I apologized for my reaction,” Callaway said. “I shouldn’t, I shouldn’t, I regret it. I regret, you know, the distraction it’s caused to the team. And like I said earlier, it’s something we’ll learn from. It’s something I’m not proud of. I’m not proud of the distraction, I’m not proud of what I did to Tim. And for that, I’m definitely sorry.”

The players held a meeting before their series opener against the Phillies to unpack Sunday’s altercation and discuss how to move on from the distraction. Mets ace Jacob deGrom took it upon himself to address the media and speak on behalf of the team.

"It was a tough loss yesterday and all you guys have been to Chicago, close proximity,” deGrom said. “Sometimes tensions run high and we understand that we have a job to do as well as the media, you guys have a job to do. Sometimes being that close after a tough loss, tensions run a little high.

“We don’t anticipate it happening again. Our main focus now is, we know this is a big series. We’re playing very important baseball right now and need to start winning. I think our main focus in having that meeting is to move forward from this, turn the page on it and focus on this series we have with the Phillies.”