5 things to watch in Thursday's Democratic debate in Miami
Half down, half to go.

On Wednesday, the nation watched 10 Democratic candidates start to make a case for why they should move into the White House in 2021. The remaining 10 who qualified to get on the debate stage at the Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts in downtown Miami are honing their notes. Many even weighed in during Wednesday’s discussion (will Thursday’s candidates speak in Spanish as much as the Wednesday group?).

Based on the two-hour event already in the books, what can viewers expect to see from the next 10 debaters?

Despite having no shot at getting into the property, the Democratic candidates and their coterie are trekking to the Homestead migrant children detention center, the largest such shelter in the United States.

The Homestead Shelter for Unaccompanied Children houses up to 3,200 children, although currently only about 2,500 are residents awaiting release to legal guardians. The average length of stay at the Homestead shelter is 35 days, according to the U.S. Health and Human Services, although advocates say the stays sometimes grow into months. Federal access to the facility is limited, and any such visit must be pre-approved.

Regardless, at least 11 of the 20 candidates in the debate have included the site in their South Florida itinerary.

With the recent focus on allegations of unsanitary conditions at a Texas housing facility, possible ICE deportation raids, and congressional wrangling over funding for border security, it made for the perfect highly charged debate topic.

And on Wednesday, it was a big talking point among the candidates on the stage. Especially between the two candidates from Texas: Julian Castro, who made impassioned statements that the U.S. should not “criminalize desperation," and Beto O’Rourke, who threw down the proverbial gauntlet by answering several questions in Spanish.

Expect more on the issue on Thursday.

Trying to stand out among the standouts

The debate nights in Miami will be historic for women in politics. When was the last time you saw this many vying for the top job in the United States?

We’ll tell you. Never.

Three women were on stage Wednesday: Sen Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Sen. Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota and Rep. Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii. On Thursday, expect to hear from Sen. Kamala Harris of California, Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and author and spiritual guru Marianne Williamson.

Until this week, fewer than a half-dozen women have ever participated in a presidential debate. On these two nights in Miami, the number nearly doubles, and women will be debating other women. And though they are similar in their gender, they are very different in their ideologies, including the military veteran Gabbard, who is much more conservative than the left-of-center Warren, who can be expected to siphon away support from Sen. Bernie Sanders.

It’s hard enough to be considered as a viable presidential contender as a man. How can a woman expect to stand out? Do they stick to traditional “women’s issues” (if there is such a thing) or avoid them?

Based on the three women on stage on Wednesday, a bit of both.

Warren, Klobuchar and Gabbard made their cases on the economy, gun activism and foreign affairs with facts, figures, anecdotes and quick one-liners. But when Washington Gov. Jay Inslee tried to say he was the only one on stage to stand up for women’s reproductive issues, Klobuchar quickly responded with “three women up here fought pretty hard for a woman’s right to choose.”

Three more women will make their case on Thursday.

They came to Miami with ambitious agendas, tons of talking points and a multitude of supporters in tow.

Their main united goal? Topple Trump.

Did the first-night contenders focus their attacks on the current office-holder, or come out punching at each other — or even their second-night opponents?

Cross off those second-night opponents. No specter of Bernie or Biden appeared. Most of the “attack" mode focused on mostly subtle jabs at Trump and occasional blatant one-liners (“I don’t think we should conduct policy at 5 a.m. in our bathrobe” by Klobuchar or “The greatest threat to the security of the United States is Donald Trump" by Inslee). But there were a few lively exchanges between the on-stage contenders as they tried to jockey for the debate “win.”

The candidates seemed uniform in their desire to unseat Trump, with Castro even predicting a president, Democratic Senate and Democratic House on Jan. 21, 2021.

Expect more of the same respect among the candidates, and a concerted focus on Trump on Thursday.

Tongue-tied and time-twisted

The Wednesday event started on time. Right to the second.

Each candidate, according to the rules, would be afforded 60-second answer and 30-second responses. Equal time was not a guarantee, and the amount of time the candidates used varied across the spectrum.

“We are not going to be shy about making the candidates stick to the time,” moderator Lester Holt announced as they launched into the debate. Second-half moderator Rachel Maddow repeated the warnings.

But, did it work?

Mostly, yes. Courtesy and an almost-uniform adherence to the time limits predominated, at least in the first 30 minutes or so. But New York Mayor Bill de Blasio was the first to jump into somebody else’s time (O’Rourke), and from then on there were times when so many people on stage were talking, not to mention the moderators trying to regain control, that a viewer couldn’t sort out what question was on the floor.

Add to that a brief technical difficulty with the microphones that led to a commercial break in the last half of the debate. Between the gabble and the mics, expect a stricter control mechanism of the discourse on the second night. Still, with so many people on stage, and so many issues to cover, the two-hour Q&A is unlikely to unfold any other way.

Look for the youngest person in the current Democratic race (South Bend, Ind., Mayor Pete Buttigieg, 37) and the oldest (Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont, 77) on Thursday.

But will age matter?

Armed with facts and figures, and drawing on her military background, Gabbard, at age 38 the youngest in the Wednesday field, held her own among the contenders. And Buttigieg will be up against not one, but two elder statesmen, when you consider former Vice President Joe Biden.

But age doesn’t seem to be at much in play with this field of candidates. In fact, most of Sanders’ support comes from a younger group of voters. But the age range will make for an interesting juxtaposition on the Miami debate stage Thursday night.
