Democratic debates: First 10 candidates hoping to oust Trump as president take to the stage
Over two nights, 20 presidential hopefuls will try to sell themselves as the person to take on Mr Trump in the 2020 US election.

Ten people hoping to oust Donald Trump as US president have taken the stage in the first of back-to-back Democratic debates.

Over two nights, 20 presidential hopefuls will attempt to sell themselves to an audience of millions as the one Democratic candidate to take on Mr Trump in the 2020 US election.

It is the American public's first chance to see all the major Democratic candidates in action against each other, and more female contenders will take part than ever before in US history.

Here, Sky News looks at the Democratic candidates involved in the first debate.

Elizabeth Warren
The senator from Massachusetts was the first Democratic politician with a national profile to indicate a willingness to enter the race.

She is a former teacher and law professor and a fierce critic of Mr Trump.

Cory Booker
The senator from New Jersey announced his candidacy on the first day of Black History Month, entering the race without using an exploratory committee first.

He is a former mayor of Newark and will not accept money from corporate political action committees (PACs) or lobbyists, hoping instead to gain enough finance from individual donations.

Beto O'Rourke
One of the breakout stars of the 2018 midterms, the former three-term congressman pushed senator Ted Cruz close in the Republican stronghold of Texas.

He drew massive rally crowds and collected $80m (eur 63m) in campaign donations, while eschewing corporate contributions.

Amy Klobuchar
The Minnesota senator has been named by The New York Times and The New Yorker as one of the women most likely to become the first female US president.

The moderate with Mid-western roots entered the race on 10 February.

Bill de Blasio
The 58-year-old from Manhattan is in his second term as mayor of New York City.

He has not released proposals as a presidential candidate but has called for higher taxes on the rich.

Tim Ryan
The US representative from Ohio is serving his eighth term in Congress and has written several books, including one about mindfulness.

He says he will recommit the US to the Paris climate agreement as president and reform the country's education system to include "social and emotional learning" in classrooms.

Tulsi Gabbard
The first Hindu member of the US House of Representatives has been campaigning on a platform of tolerance and anti-hate.

She has previously received backing from Bernie Sanders but has been criticised by some progressives.

Julian Castro
He was in the cabinet of former US president Barack Obama but has not held elected office at federal level.

Mr Castro was the youngster member of Obama's cabinet and was talked about as a potential 2016 VP at the time.

Jay Inslee
The Washington state governor is the environmental candidate, saying defeating climate change is "the most urgent challenge of our time".

Originally from Seattle, he has overseen an economic surge in his state, which is consistently in the top 10 state economies.

John Delaney
The three-term representative for the sixth Maryland district was the first Democrat to enter the race.

He announced his intention to run in a Washington Post op-ed in July 2018.
