Japanese Box Office, September 22-23
posted on 2012-10-09 06:30 UTC-8 by Crystalyn Hodgkins
1st Tiger & Bunny film debuts at #5; Rurouni Kenshin falls to #4

Keishi Otomo's live-action film adaptation of Nobuhiro Watsuki's Rurouni Kenshin manga 
fell from No. 3 to No. 4 during its fifth weekend. Takeru Satoh (Kamen Rider Den-O, 
Rookies, Beck) stars in the film's titular role, and Emi Takei (Kyo, Koi o Hajimemasu, 
For Love's Sake/Ai to Makoto) plays the heroine Kaoru Kamiya. Yuu Aoi (Hana and Alice, 
Honey and Clover) plays Megumi Takani, Munetaka Aoki (The Last Message Umizaru, 
live-action The Girl Who Leapt Through Time) plays Sanosuke Sagara, and 
Taketo Tanaka plays Yahiko Myojin. Yosuke Eguchi (Shonan Bakusozoku and Tokyo Love Story) 
as Hajime Saito, Kouji Kikkawa (Let's Dance With Papa) as Jine Udo, and Teruyuki Kagawa 
(From Up On Poppy Hill, 20th Century Boys) as Kanryu Takeda round out the cast. 
The film earned US$1,329,203 on 313 screens for a gross total of US$33,706,514.

Gekijo-ban Tiger & Bunny -The Beginning-, the first of two anime films based on 
Sunrise's Tiger & Bunny television anime series, debuted at No. 5. 
The film focuses on the story from the first television episodes, with 
new anime shots added. The film ranked at No. 3 on Box Office Mojo's chart and 
earned US$1,503,385 on 70 screens for a per-screen average of US$21,477, 
the highest average of the weekend.

The live-action film adaptation of Fujio Akatsuka's shojo comedy manga 
Himitsu no Akko-chan fell from No. 10 to No. 11 on Box Office Mojo's chart during 
its fourth weekend. In the manga, the title fifth-grader Akko-chan receives a 
magical compact from the mirror spirit. With the compact, Akko-chan can cast 
spells and transform herself into anything or anyone she wishes, and she uses 
the power to help others. In the film's updated romantic fantasy story, 
Akko-chan (Socrates in Love and Ichi's Haruka Ayase) begins as a 22-year-old 
woman whose life is transformed when she is offered a magical compact. 
Masaki Okada (Otomen, Maho Tsukai ni Taisetsu na Koto,Space Bros./Uchu Kyodai) 
will play the love interest, an "elite salaryman" at a cosmetics company. 
Over the course of the film, Akko-chan transforms into a figure skater, 
an airline cabin attendant, an office lady, a female police officer, a motorcycle racer, 
and more. The film earned US$460,330 on 217 screens for a new total of US$6,605,176.

Mamoru Hosoda's Okami Kodomo no Ame to Yuki (Wolf Children) 
film rose from No. 14 to No. 12 during its 10th weekend. 
This is the latest film by the director of Summer Wars and The Girl Who Leapt Through Time. 
The film's story covers 13 years and begins with a 19-year-old college student named 
Hana who encounters and falls in "fairy tale-like" love with a "wolf man." 
After marrying the wolf man, Hana gives birth and raises two 
wolf children — an older sister named Yuki ("snow") who was born on a snowy day, 
and a younger brother named Ame ("rain") who was born on a rainy day. 
When the wolf man suddenly dies, Hana decides to move to a rural town far removed 
from the city. The film earned US$422,904 on 381 screens for a new total of US$52,050,011.

The fourth live-action film based on Shuho Sato's (Say Hello to Black Jack, 
The Isle of TOKKOU) Umizaru coast guard manga fell from Box Office Mojo's 
chart during its 11th weekend. Shinji Aramaki's Starship Troopers: Invasion 
CG film also fell from Box Office Mojo's chart in its 10th weekend.

Box Office Mojo lists Resident Evil: Retribution as the top-grossing film for 
the second consecutive weekend, earning US$6,326,277, but Kogyo Tsushinsha 
lists the film at No 2.
