Naruto's Itachi Shinden-hen TV Anime to Premiere in March
posted on 2015-12-27 23:00 UTC-8 by Karen Ressler

The combined 5th/6th issue of Shueisha's Weekly Shonen Jump magazine will announce on January 4 that the anime 
of the Naruto spinoff novels Itachi Shinden (The True Legend of Itachi) will premiere in March 2016.

The title of the anime when it was announced earlier this month was 
Naruto Shippuden: Itachi Shinden-hen: Hikari to Yami (Naruto Shippuden: The True Legend of Itachi Volume ~Light and Darkness~). 
Shonen Jump's ad simply calls it Naruto Shippuden: Itachi Shinden-hen.

Shueisha released author Takashi Yano's Itachi Shinden novel in two parts. 
The Itachi Shinden: Komyo-hen (The True Legend of Itachi: Glory Volume, pictured below left) 
novel shipped on September 4, 
and the Itachi Shinden: Anya-hen (The True Legend of Itachi: Dark Night Volume, pictured below right) 
novel shipped on October 2. 

Amazon posted the first novel's description:
Itachi Uchiha, age four. After seeing what occurs on the battlefield up close, he makes a certain decision. 
He decided that he would change the world. 
The dream that Itachi aimed for. 
His dream: A Hokage from the Uchiha clan, and a future where those he loved could live in peace. 
His time in the ninja academy, his meeting with Shisui, becoming a Genin, Chunin, 
and finally a member of the Anbu... 
Itachi ran straight down a path of glory, not knowing that a cruel darkness was spreading...
This is the story of the glory, frustration, and determination of the ninja called a genius.
Amazon also posted the second novel's description:

Along with his sworn friend Shisui, 
Itachi undertakes an assassination mission to take out spies in order to join the Anbu. 
In addition, the rivalry between the Uchiha clan and the village becomes even more furious, 
and it finally causes the death of a friend. 
Having lost all hope in his clan and village, along with gaining a new eye and making a certain decision, 
Itachi walks into the night of tragedy. 
The kind yet cruel truth of the dream and hope he left to his brother... is revealed here.
Itachi Shinden and Sasuke Shinden were the first two installments in the Naruto Shinden (Naruto True Legend) novel series. 
Sasuke Shinden (The True Legend of Sasuke) shipped in November.

Shueisha previously published six Naruto epilogue novels earlier this year: 
Kakashi Hiden, Shikamaru Hiden, Akatsuki Hiden, Gaara Hiden, Sakura Hiden, and Konoha Hiden.
Viz Media has licensed the first three epilogue novels — Kakashi Hiden, 
Shikamaru Hiden, and Sakura Hiden — for English release in North America.
 