Last Day: Free Fortnite Skin And Loot From Amazon/Twitch Prime
Deck yourself out in exclusive gear in Fortnite: Battle Royale, if you're a Prime member.
Last updated by Chris Reed on July 10, 2018 at 2:13PM
Twitch Prime continues to be the gift that keeps on giving. Each month, Twitch users with Amazon Prime get a bunch of freebies, ranging from games to in-game items for titles. Perhaps the most exciting is free Fortnite gear, such as the Fortnite Twitch Prime Pack #2, which Epic Games has just announced. It includes exclusive free cosmetics and other items for Fortnite players, including the newcomers on Nintendo Switch. Here's what you can still get and how to obtain it. [Update: This freebie pack is only available until July 11 at 9 AM PT, just under a day before Season 5 of Battle Royale begins.]
Twitch Prime subscribers can now grab Fortnite Twitch Prime Pack #2. To claim your pack, link your Epic and Twitch accounts, then click on the crown next to the search bar on Twitch. Here's what you'll receive:
Exclusive Battle Royale Trailblazer Outfit
Exclusive Battle Royale True North Back Bling
Exclusive Battle Royale Tenderizer Pickaxe
Exclusive Battle Royale Freestylin' Emote
Note that, according to Epic's announcement, "While you can only claim your Twitch Prime loot on a single platform (PC, Mac, PlayStation 4 or Xbox One), your content is shared and available to use across PC/console and mobile, as long as you use the same Epic account. Content is not shared between Xbox One and PS4, even if you use the same Epic account."
Now is a good time to hop into Fortnite, thanks to the arrival of Thanos from Avengers: Infinity War. If you'd like some help completing this week's challenges, be sure to check out our guide to Fortnite's challenges for Week 2 of Season 4.
And if you haven't claimed Fortnite Twitch Prime Pack #1, you still can.
Some links to supporting retailers are automatically made into affiliate links, and GameSpot may receive a small share of those sales.