Boat or plane? The Caspian Sea Monster and next-gen hybrids
#Travel
(CNN) — In the late 1960s, decades deep into the Cold War, US intelligence analysts monitoring the Caspian Sea came across satellite images of an oddly shaped, winged machine of huge proportions.
The unfamiliar structure, a kind of hybrid between aircraft and ship, was quickly dubbed the "Caspian Sea Monster."
What they were looking at was an early prototype of the Soviet Union's Korabl Maket ground-effect vehicle, also known as an ekranoplan.
Ekranoplans make use of "ground effect" -- the aerodynamic forces at play when skimming close to the surface of water -- to achieve fast, but stable, low-level flight.
The Korabl Maket was a mighty example of the genre: Until the Soviet-designed Antonov An-225 came on the scene in 1988, it was the largest and heaviest aircraft ever built.
Next-generation design
In theory, the combination of speed and flexibility could allow ekranoplans to compete with seaplanes and ships. But while they make for a truly awesome sight when in flight, they've so far failed to progress any further than technological curiosity.
The reasons for this range from stability control issues in early prototypes to a lack of industrial scale for economic serial production.
In addition, ground-effect vehicles have traditionally suffered from the same limitations faced by seaplanes when it comes to taking off and landing in rough seas.
It's been almost four decades since Korabl Maket last rode the waters. It was used as a military vehicle by the Soviet Navy and sank in a testing accident in the Caspian Sea in 1980.
However, after years of research and trials, a Singaporean start-up is close to beginning production on a next-generation vehicle that aims to revolutionize coastal transport forever.
Has the ekranoplan's time come?
But this isn't the first time ground-effect vehicles have been on the verge of taking off.
While the Soviet Union was trying to develop a military ekranoplan in the 1960s, German engineers were working on their own ground-effect vehicle concept, although this was the product of a private initiative.
Alexander Lippisch, an aeronautical engineer, produced several prototypes with an inverted delta wing design, the Collins X-112, the RFB X-113 and the RFB X-114. However, they were never commercialized.
Lippisch's work was continued by his protégé, Hanno Fischer, who went on to create the AirFish 2 and AirFish 3, both precursors to the AirFish 8.
Fischer managed to complete the first working prototype of the AirFish 8 for an Australian company called Flightship, but it was never serially produced.
Subsequently, the prototype, intellectual property rights and assets were acquired by Singapore-based Wigetworks, who spent the next decade perfecting its design.
Now there are two newly built prototypes of the AirFish 8, a vehicle capable of carrying up to eight passengers and two crew, as well as its smaller sibling, the AirFish 3, which can hold just two people.
Although the roots of both models can be traced back to this decades-old project, they've been through major redesigns and technological upgrades over the past few years.