John Oliver weighs in on Anthony Kennedy's retirement: 'Everything is terrible now'
Last, but not least, John Oliver has weighed in on last week’s news that Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy is retiring at the end of July. 
Oliver dedicated the opening minutes of Sunday’s episode of “Last Week Tonight” dissecting the ramifications of Kennedy’s move, before arriving at a familiar summation for the situation.
“This is obviously huge news and for anyone who believes the Constitution protects things like reproductive and LGBTQ rights, this is bad,” Oliver said of the news and had proof to back up his claim.
“We know it’s bad, because Donald Trump Jr. was happy, tweeting ‘OMG! Just when you thought this week couldn’t get more lit… I give you Anthony Kennedy’s retirement from #SCOTUS,’” the host recounted.
“I’m afraid I’m going to have to disagree with Mr. Junior on this because I, personally, didn’t think this was lit at all,” Oliver continued.
The chief question left after Kennedy’s retirement is a matter of who the president will nominate to replace him, which Oliver quickly looked to address.
“The administration has made their plans pretty clear, with Mike Pence tweeting, ‘Thank you to Justice Anthony Kennedy for your long career of service on the SCOTUS. Trump will nominate a strong conservative in the tradition of the late Justice Scalia,’ which is a little weird,” the former “Daily Show” correspondent noted.
“You don't generally stand up at someone's retirement party and say, 'Thank you for everything you did for this company, Robert, and rest assured that we will replace you with someone exactly like that other guy who used to work here that we always liked much more than you,’” Oliver joked.

Oliver was not hopeful about Democrats chances when it comes to challenging Trump’s nominee, pointing out that it’s ultimately a numbers game.
“Unless Democrats can convince their entire party to oppose the nomination and persuade a number of Republicans over to their side, they are ... out of luck," he observed. “It's time for Democrats’ favorite game: ‘Hope Susan Collins flips and be disappointed when she doesn't!’ It's America's most depressing game show.”
But, Oliver was quick to clarify, all is not lost.
“As it turns out, there is a constitutional loophole that allows Democrats to – I'm obviously lying here. There's no good news. Everything is terrible now,” he lamented.
“I want you to go find a medium-sized cardboard box right now,” Oliver instructed the audience. “Take a pen and write ‘Time Machine’ on the side of it. Not because it will take you backwards in time — it won't, it's a cardboard box — but what I want you to do is just scream into it. Just empty all the anger and frustration that you're feeling right now into that box and when you done, tape it up, go out, vote, knock on doors and take that box with you.”
“And if you ever come across someone who's thinking of sitting out an election because neither of the candidates quite do it for them, there's not much difference between them anyway, open that box into their ... face and let yourself from this week scream some sense into them.”
Oof. 
Full episodes of “Last Week Tonight” are available for viewing on HBO GO.

