As NBA free agency nears, Knicks fans have hope. And despair. And more hope. And more despair.

NEW YORK — All through the bygone autumn and winter and spring, the starved and haunted and durable brain of a New York Knicks fan might have kept boomeranging. It might have plunged into tantalizing traps beneath dangling hope born of relentless chatter about free agency fantasy. And it might have clambered back to reality so hard-won in a stretch of 574-886 (.393) since 2001, of 126-284 (.307) since 2014.

Then it might have plunged again. That’s how it could make flawless sense when a 29-year-old fan from Newark named Elliot Banks said, “I didn’t fall into the trap, which eventually I did.”

That’s how one could nod as he said: “I tried to fight falling into the trap. Don’t get me wrong; it was cool to hear. And you would start to daydream.”

That’s how, when it came to the photos doctoring Kevin Durant, Kyrie Irving and Zion Williamson into Knicks uniforms, Banks eventually allowed one into the sanctuary of his phone but not onto its screen. “I didn’t go that far,” he said, “because why do that to myself?”
“I kind of wish they didn’t talk about the Knicks,” Banks said of those on media platforms. “I wish we were the [Brooklyn] Nets. All year I heard about Zion and we were going to get Zion and going to get K.D., and that’s not fair. All year long. They’ve got to fill the talking space, but my God: Talk about something else.”

Now comes the weekend that at 6 p.m. Sunday will unleash NBA free agency, which often seems more anticipated than the, you know, games. Now comes a tenor of a metropolis that, Knicks-wise, one might peg as measured, confused (regarding Durant) or even indifferent — strange given the club’s roughly $70 million in salary cap space, that fetching, league-leading statistic.
The goblin of a draft lottery May 14, which disrupted Banks’s sleep for the two nights prior, wound up arranging Williamson’s residence in New Orleans, two slots before the Knicks took Williamson’s Duke teammate RJ Barrett, part of the brigade deemed excellent-but-not-Williamson.

Durant, of course, tore his right Achilles’ tendon in Game 5 of the NBA Finals on June 10, all but mandating an idle next season wherever — and with whomever — he signs.
On the two talk-radio shows in a cliffhanging battle that New Yorkers actually and eccentrically follow, the Knicks did not fill Friday afternoon as they might have. The Mets gobbled up time, as will spectacular disintegration. Should the Yankees corral Madison Bumgarner? Special commendation to the caller who noted the Yankees and Red Sox playing in London and asked the king of New York sports talk, WFAN host Mike Francesa, “You think they’re going to make ’em run to third base instead of first base?” On ESPN New York’s “The Michael Kay Show,” talk went to whether Durant could become the next Mark Messier, who manned the Rangers to the Stanley Cup in 1994 after the drought reached 54 years.
Soon they veered to a brief chat with a competitive eater.

Nostalgia kicked in up and down the dial in a metropolitan area with a drought-like one title among nine franchises in this long decade (and none from the Knicks in 46 years). Discussing with Francesa the fact that in the 482 days between Jan. 12, 1969, and May 8, 1970, New York won a Super Bowl (Jets), a World Series (Mets) and an NBA title (Knicks), a caller pulled a classic New York radio moment when he blurted, “Yeah, and you had the guy walk on the moon!”
