The world's most harrowing roads (that you'd actually want to drive)
#Travel
(CNN) — Ready for a road trip you'll never forget? Set your sights on one of these adventurous stretches of highway that provide access to some of the most arresting scenery on the planet.
These are hands-on drives: none of our 10 picks will allow you to let your guard down or let cruise control do most of the driving.
But you'll be rewarded with travel panoramas few people ever get to see. Just remember to keep your eyes on the road, though.
Stelvio Pass
Italy
Sure, the Stelvio Pass is no longer a secret. There's an Alfa-Romeo SUV named after the switchback-laden stretch of Italian tarmac bordering Switzerland, and hordes of drivers show up every summer to check out the road British motoring program "Top Gear" once called the greatest in the world.
But wake up early, and you'll find that the Stelvio's still a jaw-dropping drive worthy of your bucket list. Boasting epic views of the eastern Alps -- that is, when you can afford to look up from the road: there are 75 turns during the climb to 9,045 feet above sea level.
Big number: Three -- the number of languages (Italian, Romansh and German) that historically converged at Dreisprachenspitze peak, just above the route.
When to go: June to October, generally; check for road opening and closing dates.
Fly into: Zurich, Switzerland (ZRH) or Milan, Italy (MXP)
This wild Romanian road that crosses the Carpathian Mountains has quite the backstory: depending on who you ask, it was built either to protect against the possibility of a Soviet invasion, or it was a folly, built by Nicolae Ceau?escu simply because he could.
Either way, hundreds reportedly died during dynamite blasts during construction in the 1970s. The result of their efforts is sometimes referred to as "the road to the sky" as the route gently climbs from 1,630 feet to 6,700 feet in elevation, with near endless hairpin turns (such a design would facilitate moving heavy military equipment.)
It's an engineering marvel: the 71-mile route required a mind-bending array of bridge crossings.
Big number: 1,480 -- the number of stairs that climb toward the 13th-century Poenari Castle where Vlad the Impaler, inspiration for Bram Stoker's Dracula, lived. It's just off the route.
When to go: June to October, but be sure to check for road openings.
Fly into: Bucharest, Romania (OTP)