School district apologizes after valedictorian’s speech was cut off when she mentioned Tamir Rice, Travyon Martin
A Texas school district apologized after a valedictorian’s speech was cut off by her principal at the mention of Trayvon Martin and Tamir Rice.
The Dallas Independent School District said in a statement that Valedictorian Rooha Haghar, of the Emmett J. Conrad High School, included remarks in her speech that were not approved by the administration.
“As a result, the principal made the decision to limit the student's remarks,” the statement, released Monday, read.
“In hindsight, we realize this decision may not have been reflective of the core values we teach our students, as we work to educate leaders of tomorrow. For that, we apologize.”
Haghar first brought attention to the issue after posting a video on Twitter of the moment her microphone stopped working. In the video, the principal can be seen motioning to someone off-screen after she says, “To the kids that were murdered in senseless mass shootings. To Trayvon Martin, Tamir Rice and all the other children who became victims of injustice.”
“Our principal signaled for my mic to be turned off as soon as i said ‘trayvon martin and tamir rice’ and played it off as a technical difficulty. Pathetic,” she wrote on June 3.
She admitted that while she was specifically told not to include the names of Martin and Rice, “[she] made a conscious choice and [she] stands behind that choice.”
Haghar later shared the entirety of her speech, in which she remarked that while she and the other students were receiving their diplomas and “moving on to bigger things, there are students who were robbed of this opportunity.”
[More U.S. News] Persistent pup survives 13 days in wilderness after being thrown in car wreck »
Haghar said she was not trying to create more divisiveness by bringing attention to the incident, but feels that certain conversations need to be had.
Martin, 17, was fatally shot by a neighborhood watch volunteer, George Zimmerman, in February 2012 in Sanford, Fla. Zimmerman was acquitted in his death.
Rice, 12, was shot and killed by Cleveland police officer Timothy Loehmann, who was responding to call that someone was pointing a gun at people. Rice was playing with a pellet gun. A Cuyahoga County Grand jury declined to bring criminal charges against Loehmann.
Two Florida teens have been charged in the shooting death of a man who asked them for 50 cents on Tuesday.
Kennidi Jones and Tywaun Bivins were charged with second-degree murder and accessory after the fact. Bivins also faces an additional charge of delinquent possession of a firearm.
They are both 15, but are being charged as adults.
The pair are accused of killing 20-year-old Tyson Binder, who asked them for change.
Bivins gave Tallahassee Police multiple versions of what happened, but he reportedly told police that Jones shot the victim.
[More News] At least two dead after workplace shooting at California Ford dealership: reports »
When they told the man they didn’t have money for him, he said something that angered Jones, the Tallahassee Democrat reported.
After discussing whether or not to follow and confront Binder, Jones allegedly went into his apartment and asked his sister for her gun, police said.
When the teens caught up to Binder, Jones allegedly punched him in the mouth and shot the man when he moved towards him.
[More News] 47 dogs confiscated from Trenton home »
Binder was shot three times: once in the leg, once in the shoulder and once in the head.
Jones then got rid of the gun in a local park, according to Bivins, but Jones told police he only wanted to fight Binder and denied asking for the gun or even knowing where it came from, the Tallahassee Democrat reported.
Both teens are being held at the Leon County Detention Facility and made their first appearances in court on Friday morning.