Taylor Swift and Katy Perry officially end their feud: A timeline on how we got here
It wasn’t exactly swift, but the longstanding feud between Taylor Swift and Katy Perry appears to have finally, officially reached its conclusion.
Katy Perry shared an Instagram photo showing a plate of cookies with “Peace At Last” written out in red icing. Swift was tagged in the post, signaling the end of any disharmony between the superstar singers.
“Feels good,” Perry captioned the picture.
But how did we get here in the first place?
Here’s a breakdown of what transpired over the years that all led up to this fateful day.
Before the feud:
There wasn’t always bad blood between Swift and Perry. Just look back to 2009, when Swift complimented Perry’s “Waking Up in Vegas” music video, earning an effusive reply from Perry.
“You’re as sweet as pie! Let’s write a song together about the subject we know best... for my new record. It’ll be brilliant,” Perry tweeted at the time.
But years later…
Swift acknowledged that her cutting 2014 acrimony anthem “Bad Blood” was about another artist ? without naming her.
“She did something so horrible,” Swift told Rolling Stone at the time. “I was like, ‘Oh, we’re just straight-up enemies.’ And it wasn’t even about a guy! It had to do with business. She basically tried to sabotage an entire arena tour. She tried to hire a bunch of people out from under me.”
Fans were quick to connect Swift’s comment to Perry, who apparently hired several dancers who were on Swift’s tour.
Perry even seemed to weigh in on the drama, tweeting, “Watch out for the Regina George in sheep’s clothing…”
And it got worse:
In 2016, Perry replied to a fan on Twitter that she would consider collaborating with Swift if she said she was “sorry.” Later that year, Perry filmed a short video showing her dancing at a concert as Kanye West rapped a lewd lyric about Swift in his song “Famous.”
And in 2017, Perry released “Swish Swish,” a song that many interpreted as a dig at Swift due to the biting lyrics and closeness of the title to Swift’s name.
Then “Look What You Made Me Do Came Out”
When Swift released the music video for her wildly popular ? and edgy ? single later in 2017, some fans speculated that certain scenes were references to her contentiousness with Perry.
Those included a clip of a rat on a plate, which some fans felt was a jab at Perry and her song "Bon Appétit,” and another scene showing Swift with a hairdo that some fans suggested looked like one of Perry’s.
But then things seemed to get better:
The feud really seemed to end in May 2018 when Swift posted a photo on Instagram of an actual olive branch, along with a letter apparently penned by Perry.
“Thank you Katy,” Swift wrote in the post.
And now here we are:
If the olive branch wasn’t enough evidence of reconciliation, perhaps the cookies will be

