Is a Dumber Phone a Better Phone?
By John Herrman
May 16, 2018

If all goes according to plan, in April of next year, thousands of people will receive a package containing a device called the Light Phone 2. The project was funded on Indiegogo, and many Light Phone customers will have been waiting for an entire year by then. It’s the second iteration of the device, but by modern standards, the phone will be primitive, with a colorless screen and none of the familiar apps. This lack of functionality is spun as a benefit; the Light Phone is marketed as “a phone that actually respects you.” It’s a manifestly absurd series of words, but I suspect more than a few of us understand perfectly what it’s supposed to mean.

If you’re one of those people, it seems likely that your smartphone doubles as your alarm clock, meaning it’s the very first thing you hear every day, rousing you from your sleep before spilling a night’s worth of inbound information into view the moment it is silenced. From that point, it is hungry for attention: In the bathroom, in the kitchen and at the table, it is a constant accomplice, as helpful or unhelpful as you want or allow it to be.

In the car, it is a navigator, a radio, a nagging distractor and a ready accessory to manslaughter; at work, it is both a vigilant assistant and an eager fellow shirker. It funnels all types and degrees of information through a few common interfaces, supplying a delirious new channel alongside your inner monologue: An important security update regarding your account. I love you, and I can’t wait to see you. Reminder: Call back the eye doc. The identity of the Golden State Killer was discovered using a genealogy database, investigators said. Your credit score has changed. Three missed calls from “SCAM LIKELY.” One missed call from “BOSS’S BOSS.”

The smartphone is half of a strained and intimate relationship, one that we never could have imagined would become so serious, but which we now can’t imagine leaving. This portrait of discontent would seem to suggest a need — or at least some demand — for smartphone alternatives. But the market has yet to signal that it’s sick of smartphones, only that it is running out of people who haven’t owned at least one. Sales are still growing; they’re just accelerating less. The obvious demand is still for more.

This sense of inevitability has some customers, and companies, looking for a release, an escape or at least an alternative. While the most influential tech companies are trying to figure out what products they can make to use alongside smartphones — on your wrist, in your head, over your eye — some more marginal companies are charting less obvious trajectories. Their respective approaches differ, but they make at least one common assumption: The best option, at this point, isn’t to make phones better. It’s to make them worse.

Few companies are better positioned to make a less-smart phone than Nokia, a company that defined and dominated the global cellphone market until about the time when the iPhone arrived. In early 2017, Nokia announced a new model, the 3310, based loosely on a predecessor of the same name first released in 2000, a.k.a. “the Brick,” one of the most popular cellphones in the world. It is not the purpose of the 3310 to offer much of anything new, but it can at least offer a challenge: You joke that you miss your old phone, so here’s a chance to buy one. I did: It works; it makes and takes calls; it sends and receives texts. It can, with extraordinary difficulty, summon Google. But its familiarity belies how ill adapted it is to even a conscientious smartphone objector. I almost instantly wished, for example, that I could trade the newly added camera for GPS mapping, a smartphone feature that has been an unobtrusive improvement in my life. The 3310 is at its genuine best when it falls like a smooth stone into your pocket, where, rather than constantly buzzing at the periphery of your consciousness, it sits inert, ready mostly to be ignored.

There are newly designed less-smart phones that better split the difference: the Light Phone 2 and the Unihertz Jelly, a full-fledged but strategically miniaturized Android handset. Each is well equipped for the moment, gesturing, in some element of its design, to the contradictory and possibly unresolvable feelings of the disaffected smartphone user. Each also got off to a strong start, identifying at least a sliver of demand with viral crowdfunding campaigns: The Light Phone raised more than $1.5 million on Indiegogo for its second iteration; the Jelly raised $1.7 million on Kickstarter and Indiegogo.

The Light Phone promised detoxification and escape, taking and encouraging a performative approach to smartphone anxiety — a conspicuously consumed juice cleanse, a loudly anticipated fast, a week away “off the grid.” It was, in its first iteration, capable only of making calls. (The 2 will allow texting and might include basic mapping and ride-hailing. Social media, the company says, is a “no go.”) In essence, it’s a luxurious protest, a wellness-oriented alternative to powering up an old flip phone or strutting out the door devil-free.

If the Light Phone suggests that the problem with your iPhone is that it does too much, the Jelly instead proposes that it’s too good at doing what it does: too easy to get lost in, like a TV; too easy to do work on, like a laptop; too easy to turn to in a moment of silence or inactivity. The Jelly has all the basic stuff: It runs a version of Google’s Android, it has high-speed data and it supports the same apps available to any other smartphone user. But its anti-innovation is brutal: It has a tiny, 2.45-inch screen. Its approach to smartphone moderation is to make the process of using it difficult enough that, in more marginal cases, it’s simply not worth it. It’s an engagement machine with the resistance turned up as high as possible. Messages become shorter. Reading becomes more deliberate. An idle check of the phone is associated less with the rush of refreshing an app than with the tedious process of opening one in the first place. As an individual strategy, the device supposes that helplessness might be solved, or at least replaced, with frustration.

None of these phones are likely to draw many customers, at least compared with the smartphone giants, and they don’t pretend that they’re going to change the course of an industry. They would each be successful if they slightly reformed a few thousand customers’ individual habits. More important, they say things that the major smartphone companies simply can’t: that there are cracks in this relationship, and they’re not going to heal themselves. One day, the costs of festering mutual resentment could serve to make the problems worse: for the manufacturers, a decrease in profit, and, possibly in response, an intentionally exploitative approach to product design; for us, a decline in personal well-being that we don’t yet have the framework or vocabulary to even properly discuss.

They are the products the tech giants haven’t given us and probably never will. But they illustrate, at least, how narrow the industry’s imagination has become, and how much we wish for its expansion in any direction but directly, inevitably forward. They may also suggest a need to adjust our collective sense of what smartphones are, and why they bother us when they do.

Another world-altering technology offers a good comparison point: the automobile. We might enjoy driving, and we are miserable in traffic. We buy cars because we need them, and we might buy specific cars because we want them, and the best ones can make a bad commute more bearable. But the problem isn’t our car. It’s all the other cars; the cities designed around them; the roads created for and now clogged by them. Smartphones are now trapped inside the world we’ve constructed around them, and so are we. If we want to escape, it won’t be another phone that gets us out.


