Kaler Announces He is Leaving Post as President at U of M
Eric Kaler, who has served as president at the University of Minnesota since 2011, will leave his role in July of next year.

Kaler announced his decision in a letter released Friday morning,

"Today I write to inform you of my decision to step down as President on July 1, 2019," it began. "My tenure already exceeds the national average. This is an incredibly demanding job, essentially seven days a week, evenings and nights included, and as proud and confident of my contributions and ability as I am, I also know that the University will benefit from a fresh perspective.

"Quite simply, it is time."

A few hours later, Kaler and U of M Board of Regents Chairman David McMillan held a joint news conference to formally announce Kaler's decision.I have either accomplished or will have accomplished by the end of next year all I set out to do when I started as president in 2011," Kaler said. "I laid out some goals in my inauguration speech that frankly we will have met. So as I said in my opening, a good leader knows when it's time to go. This institution will benefit from new perspectives and new ideas that a new leader will bring."

In a one-on-one interview with 5 Eyewitness News after his news conference, Kaler acknowledged handling controversies in the athletics department was among the most challenging parts of his job.

"Sometimes you have a situation where there really isn't a good path forward and I feel that we've handled them with integrity, with transparency and with honesty," he said of controversies in the football, basketball and wrestling programs. "But some of those were very challenging situations for sure."

Prior to arriving in Minnesota, Kaler served as the provost and senior vice president at Stony Brook University in Stony Brook, New York. Before that, he was the dean of the University of Delaware's School of Engineering.

His letter said he plans to work as president emeritus for one year after his departure in order to "continue the momentum on our $4 billion Driven campaign."

He said he will then take a sabbatical before assuming a faculty position in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science at the school.

"As your President, I am honored and privileged to lead an institution that directly affects the residents of the great State of Minnesota and people around the globe," he wrote in his letter.

"Our healthcare breakthroughs are historic. Our science and technology, awe inspiring. Our commitment to the arts, breathtaking. And our core mission, teaching the next generation of leaders, absolutely incredible.

Gov. Mark Dayton lauded Kaler's contributions to the school in a statement.

"President Kaler has provided dedicated and principled leadership to the University of Minnesota," the statement read. "All of us owe him a debt of gratitude for his very important contributions to the betterment of our University and our State."

