More job cuts expected in mortgage banking

The pace of job losses in mortgage 
lending slowed in December, as some companies shifted workers 
to other areas of financial services, but the losses may pick 
up again in the new year as the U.S. housing market continues 
to weaken and credit remains tight. 

The government said on Friday that 7,000 jobs were lost in 
December in credit intermediation, a Bureau of Labor Statistics 
(BLS) category that includes mortgage lending and related 
activities. That follows a drop of 13,000 jobs in November.  Job losses since the industry's peak in February 2007 now 
total 79,000 people. By comparison, the U.S. construction 
industry has lost 236,000 jobs since its peak in September 
2006, the BLS said.  Executives at staffing companies that provide temporary and 
permanent workers to the industry are divided over whether the 
worst is over.  "I'm sure all the write-downs haven't (yet) been taken by 
the financial services firms, but it suggests that they've made 
the adjustments on the employment side that are going be 
required," said Tig Gilliam, chief executive of Adecco North 
America. Adecco is the world's biggest staffing firm.  Some Adecco clients have reallocated resources, but only 
diversified companies have that flexibility, he said.  "I had a client who took exactly the same number of jobs 
from a call center focused on mortgage sales and moved them to 
credit card," Gilliam said. "Companies that are solely focused 
on the mortgage arena won't have that opportunity."  U.S. mortgage lenders have been cutting jobs in recent 
months to lower costs and react to tightening credit 
conditions. Countrywide Financial Corp CFC.N has said it 
would cut up to 12,000 jobs. Earlier this week, National City 
Corp NCC.N slashed its dividend and announced 900 job cuts.  Also cutting jobs in the past year were Washington Mutual 
Inc ( WM.N ) and Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc LEH.N  People with specialized skills cannot easily be moved to a 
different department, said Robert Morgan, co-president of 
recruitment and talent management at Hudson Highland Group Inc  HHGP.O.  "You can't absorb that all at once," Morgan said, adding 
that the bulk of layoffs have probably already been announced.  "Banks have been pretty aggressive, at least that's what 
we're hearing from the banks," he said. "They've taken 
aggressive actions in 2007 so they can start 2008 out fresh and 
clean."  Carl Camden, chief executive of Kelly Services Inc 
( KELYA.O ) said he expects further job cuts in the sector in 
coming months.  "Following the news on declines in mortgage applications, 
declines in credit applications, the crunch and so on, I had 
thought the decline (would be) greater than it was," he said.  "Until you see reports of a turnaround in new home sales or 
sales of old homes, and in credit activity, I think you'll see 
a continued slow decline in that sector."